
Electrical Power Systems Quality, Second Edition 
 
    CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 
    What is Power Quality? 
    Power Quality -- Voltage Quality 
    Why Are We Concerned About Power Quality? 
    The Power Quality Evaluation Procedure 
    Who Should Use This Book 
    Overview of the Contents 
 
    CHAPTER 2: TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
    Need for a Consistent Vocabulary 
    General Classes of Power Quality Problems 
    Transients 
    Long-Duration Voltage Variations 
    Short-Duration Voltage Variations 
    Voltage Imbalance 
    Waveform Distortion 
    Voltage Fluctuation 
    Power Frequency Variations 
    Power Quality Terms 
    Ambiguous Terms 
    CBEMA and ITI Curves 
    References 
 
    CHAPTER 3: VOLTAGE SAGS AND INTERRUPTIONS 
    Sources of Sags and Interruptions 
    Estimating Voltage Sag Performance 
    Fundamental Principles of Protection 
    Solutions at the End-User Level 
    Evaluating the Economics of Different Ride-Through Alternatives 
    Motor-Starting Sags 
    Utility System Fault-Clearing Issues 
    References 
 
    CHAPTER 4: TRANSIENT OVERVOLTAGES 
    Sources of Transient Overvoltages 
    Principles of Overvoltage Protection 
    Devices for Overvoltage Protection 
    Utility Capacitor-Switching Transients 
    Utility System Lightning Protection 
    Managing Ferroresonance 
    Switching Transient Problems with Loads 
    Computer Tools for Transients Analysis 
    References 
 
    CHAPTER 5: FUNDAMENTALS OF HARMONICS 
    Harmonic Distortion 
    Voltage versus Current Distortion 
    Harmonics versus Transients 
    Harmonic Indexes 
    Harmonic Sources from Commercial Loads 
    Harmonic Sources from Industrial Loads 
    Locating Harmonic Sources 
    System Response Characteristics 
    Effects of Harmonic Distortion 
    Interharmonics 
    References 
    Bibliography 
 
    CHAPTER 6: APPLIED HARMONICS 
    Harmonic Distortion Evaluations 
    Principles for Controlling Harmonics 

    Where to Control Harmonics 
    Harmonic Studies 
    Devices for Controlling Harmonic Distortion 
    Harmonic Filter Design: A Case Study 
    Case Studies 
    Standards of Harmonics 
    References 
    Bibliography 
 
    CHAPTER 7: LONG-DURATION VOLTAGE VARIATIONS 
    Principles of Regulating the Voltage 
    Devices for Voltage Regulation 
    Utility Voltage Regulator Application 
    Capacitors for Voltage Regulation 
    End-User Capacitor Application 
    Regulating Utility Voltage with Distributed Resources 
    Flicker 
    References 
    Bibliography 
 
    CHAPTER 8: POWER QUALITY BENCHMARKING 
    Introduction 
    Benchmarking Process 
    RMS Voltage Variation Indices 
    Harmonics Indices 
    Power Quality Contracts 
    Power Quality Insurance 
    Power Quality State Estimation 
    Including Power Quality in Distribution Planning 
    References 
    Bibliography 
 
    CHAPTER 9: DISTRIBUTED GENERATION AND POWER QUALITY 
    Resurgence of DG 
    DG Technologies 
    Interface to the Utility System 
    Power Quality Issues 
    Operating Conflicts 
    DG on Distribution Networks 
    Siting DGDistributed Generation 
    Interconnection Standards 
    Summary 
    References 
    Bibliography 
 
    CHAPTER 10: WIRING AND GROUNDING 
    Resources 
    Definitions 
    Reasons for Grounding 
    Typical Wiring and Grounding Problems 
    Solutions to Wiring and Grounding Problems 
    Bibliography 
 
    CHAPTER 11: POWER QUALITY MONITORING 
    Monitoring Considerations 
    Historical Perspective of Power Quality Measuring Instruments 
    Power Quality Measurement Equipment 
    Assessment of Power Quality Measurement Data 
    Application of Intelligent Systems 
    Power Quality Monitoring Standards 
    References 
    Index 

1
Introduction
Both electric utilities and end users of electric power are becoming
increasingly concerned about the quality of electric power. The term
power quality has become one of the most prolific buzzwords in the
power industry since the late 1980s. It is an umbrella concept for a mul-
titude of individual types of power system disturbances. The issues
that fall under this umbrella are not necessarily new. What is new is
that engineers are now attempting to deal with these issues using a
system approach rather than handling them as individual problems.
There are four major reasons for the increased concern:
1. Newer-generation load equipment, with microprocessor-based con-
trols and power electronic devices, is more sensitive to power qual-
ity variations than was equipment used in the past.
2. The increasing emphasis on overall power system efficiency has
resulted in continued growth in the application of devices such as
high-efficiency, adjustable-speed motor drives and shunt capacitors
for power factor correction to reduce losses. This is resulting in
increasing harmonic levels on power systems and has many people
concerned about the future impact on system capabilities.
3. End users have an increased awareness of power quality issues.
Utility customers are becoming better informed about such issues as
interruptions, sags, and switching transients and are challenging
the utilities to improve the quality of power delivered.
4. Many things are now interconnected in a network. Integrated
processes mean that the failure of any component has much more
important consequences.
Chapter1
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The common thread running though all these reasons for increased
concern about the quality of electric power is the continued push for
increasing productivity for all utility customers. Manufacturers want
faster, more productive, more efficient machinery. Utilities encourage
this effort because it helps their customers become more profitable and
also helps defer large investments in substations and generation by
using more efficient load equipment. Interestingly, the equipment
installed to increase the productivity is also often the equipment that
suffers the most from common power disruptions. And the equipment
is sometimes the source of additional power quality problems. When
entire processes are automated, the efficient operation of machines and
their controls becomes increasingly dependent on quality power.
Since the first edition of this book was published, there have been
some developments that have had an impact on power quality:
1. Throughout the world, many governments have revised their laws
regulating electric utilities with the intent of achieving more cost-com-
petitive sources of electric energy. Deregulation of utilities has compli-
cated the power quality problem. In many geographic areas there is no
longer tightly coordinated control of the power from generation
through end-use load. While regulatory agencies can change the laws
regarding the flow of money, the physical laws of power flow cannot be
altered. In order to avoid deterioration of the quality of power supplied
to customers, regulators are going to have to expand their thinking
beyond traditional reliability indices and address the need for power
quality reporting and incentives for the transmission and distribution
companies.
2. There has been a substantial increase of interest in distributed
generation (DG), that is, generation of power dispersed throughout the
power system. There are a number of important power quality issues
that must be addressed as part of the overall interconnection evalua-
tion for DG. Therefore, we have added a chapter on DG.
3. The globalization of industry has heightened awareness of defi-
ciencies in power quality around the world. Companies building facto-
ries in new areas are suddenly faced with unanticipated problems with
the electricity supply due to weaker systems or a different climate.
There have been several efforts to benchmark power quality in one part
of the world against other areas.
4. Indices have been developed to help benchmark the various
aspects of power quality. Regulatory agencies have become involved in
performance-based rate-making (PBR), which addresses a particular
aspect, reliability, which is associated with interruptions. Some cus-
tomers have established contracts with utilities for meeting a certain
quality of power delivery. We have added a new chapter on this subject.
2
Chapter One
Introduction
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

1.1
What Is Power Quality?
There can be completely different definitions for power quality, depend-
ing on one’s frame of reference. For example, a utility may define power
quality as reliability and show statistics demonstrating that its system
is 99.98 percent reliable. Criteria established by regulatory agencies
are usually in this vein. A manufacturer of load equipment may define
power quality as those characteristics of the power supply that enable
the equipment to work properly. These characteristics can be very dif-
ferent for different criteria.
Power quality is ultimately a consumer-driven issue, and the end
user’s point of reference takes precedence. Therefore, the following def-
inition of a power quality problem is used in this book:
Any power problem manifested in voltage, current, or frequency devia-
tions that results in failure or misoperation of customer equipment.
There are many misunderstandings regarding the causes of power
quality problems. The charts in Fig. 1.1 show the results of one survey
conducted by the Georgia Power Company in which both utility per-
sonnel and customers were polled about what causes power quality
problems. While surveys of other market sectors might indicate differ-
ent splits between the categories, these charts clearly illustrate one
common theme that arises repeatedly in such surveys: The utility’s and
customer’s perspectives are often much different. While both tend to
blame about two-thirds of the events on natural phenomena (e.g., light-
ning), customers, much more frequently than utility personnel, think
that the utility is at fault.
When there is a power problem with a piece of equipment, end users
may be quick to complain to the utility of an “outage” or “glitch” that has
caused the problem. However, the utility records may indicate no abnor-
mal events on the feed to the customer. We recently investigated a case
where the end-use equipment was knocked off line 30 times in 9 months,
but there were only five operations on the utility substation breaker. It
must be realized that there are many events resulting in end-user prob-
lems that never show up in the utility statistics. One example is capaci-
tor switching, which is quite common and normal on the utility system,
but can cause transient overvoltages that disrupt manufacturing
machinery. Another example is a momentary fault elsewhere in the sys-
tem that causes the voltage to sag briefly at the location of the customer
in question. This might cause an adjustable-speed drive or a distributed
generator to trip off, but the utility will have no indication that anything
was amiss on the feeder unless it has a power quality monitor installed.
In addition to real power quality problems, there are also perceived
power quality problems that may actually be related to hardware, soft-
Introduction
3
Introduction
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ware, or control system malfunctions. Electronic components can
degrade over time due to repeated transient voltages and eventually
fail due to a relatively low magnitude event. Thus, it is sometimes dif-
ficult to associate a failure with a specific cause. It is becoming more
common that designers of control software for microprocessor-based
equipment have an incomplete knowledge of how power systems oper-
ate and do not anticipate all types of malfunction events. Thus, a device
can misbehave because of a deficiency in the embedded software. This
is particularly common with early versions of new computer-controlled
4
Chapter One
Other
3%
Other
0%
Utility
17%
Utility Perception
Customer Perception
Utility
1%
Natural
60%
Natural
66%
Neighbor
8%
Neighbor
8%
Customer
12%
Customer
25%
Figure 1.1
Results of a survey on the causes of power quality
problems. (Courtesy of Georgia Power Co.)
Introduction
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

load equipment. One of the main objectives of this book is to educate
utilities, end users, and equipment suppliers alike to reduce the fre-
quency of malfunctions caused by software deficiencies.
In response to this growing concern for power quality, electric utilities
have programs that help them respond to customer concerns. The phi-
losophy of these programs ranges from reactive, where the utility
responds to customer complaints, to proactive, where the utility is
involved in educating the customer and promoting services that can
help develop solutions to power quality problems. The regulatory issues
facing utilities may play an important role in how their programs are
structured. Since power quality problems often involve interactions
between the supply system and the customer facility and equipment,
regulators should make sure that distribution companies have incen-
tives to work with customers and help customers solve these problems.
The economics involved in solving a power quality problem must also
be included in the analysis. It is not always economical to eliminate
power quality variations on the supply side. In many cases, the optimal
solution to a problem may involve making a particular piece of sensi-
tive equipment less sensitive to power quality variations. The level of
power quality required is that level which will result in proper opera-
tion of the equipment at a particular facility.
Power quality, like quality in other goods and services, is difficult to
quantify. There is no single accepted definition of quality power. There
are standards for voltage and other technical criteria that may be mea-
sured, but the ultimate measure of power quality is determined by the
performance and productivity of end-user equipment. If the electric
power is inadequate for those needs, then the “quality” is lacking.
Perhaps nothing has been more symbolic of a mismatch in the power
delivery system and consumer technology than the “blinking clock”
phenomenon. Clock designers created the blinking display of a digital
clock to warn of possible incorrect time after loss of power and inad-
vertently created one of the first power quality monitors. It has made
the homeowner aware that there are numerous minor disturbances
occurring throughout the power delivery system that may have no ill
effects other than to be detected by a clock. Many appliances now have
a built-in clock, so the average household may have about a dozen
clocks that must be reset when there is a brief interruption. Older-tech-
nology motor-driven clocks would simply lose a few seconds during
minor disturbances and then promptly come back into synchronism.
1.2
Power Quality  Voltage Quality
The common term for describing the subject of this book is power qual-
ity; however, it is actually the quality of the voltage that is being
Introduction
5
Introduction
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

addressed in most cases. Technically, in engineering terms, power is
the rate of energy delivery and is proportional to the product of the volt-
age and current. It would be difficult to define the quality of this quan-
tity in any meaningful manner. The power supply system can only
control the quality of the voltage; it has no control over the currents
that particular loads might draw. Therefore, the standards in the
power quality area are devoted to maintaining the supply voltage
within certain limits.
AC power systems are designed to operate at a sinusoidal voltage of
a given frequency [typically 50 or 60 hertz (Hz)] and magnitude. Any
significant deviation in the waveform magnitude, frequency, or purity
is a potential power quality problem.
Of course, there is always a close relationship between voltage and
current in any practical power system. Although the generators may
provide a near-perfect sine-wave voltage, the current passing through
the impedance of the system can cause a variety of disturbances to the
voltage. For example,
1. The current resulting from a short circuit causes the voltage to sag
or disappear completely, as the case may be.
2. Currents from lightning strokes passing through the power system
cause high-impulse voltages that frequently flash over insulation
and lead to other phenomena, such as short circuits.
3. Distorted currents from harmonic-producing loads also distort the
voltage as they pass through the system impedance. Thus a dis-
torted voltage is presented to other end users.
Therefore, while it is the voltage with which we are ultimately con-
cerned, we must also address phenomena in the current to understand
the basis of many power quality problems.
1.3
Why Are We Concerned about Power
Quality?
The ultimate reason that we are interested in power quality is eco-
nomic value. There are economic impacts on utilities, their customers,
and suppliers of load equipment.
The quality of power can have a direct economic impact on many
industrial consumers. There has recently been a great emphasis on
revitalizing industry with more automation and more modern equip-
ment. This usually means electronically controlled, energy-efficient
equipment that is often much more sensitive to deviations in the sup-
ply voltage than were its electromechanical predecessors. Thus, like
the blinking clock in residences, industrial customers are now more
6
Chapter One
Introduction
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

acutely aware of minor disturbances in the power system. There is big
money associated with these disturbances. It is not uncommon for a
single, commonplace, momentary utility breaker operation to result in
a $10,000 loss to an average-sized industrial concern by shutting down
a production line that requires 4 hours to restart. In the semiconductor
manufacturing industry, the economic impacts associated with equip-
ment sensitivity to momentary voltage sags resulted in the develop-
ment of a whole new standard for equipment ride-through (SEMI
Standard F-47, Specification for Semiconductor Process Equipment
Voltage Sag Immunity).
The electric utility is concerned about power quality issues as well.
Meeting customer expectations and maintaining customer confidence
are strong motivators. With today’s movement toward deregulation
and competition between utilities, they are more important than ever.
The loss of a disgruntled customer to a competing power supplier can
have a very significant impact financially on a utility.
Besides the obvious financial impacts on both utilities and industrial
customers, there are numerous indirect and intangible costs associated
with power quality problems. Residential customers typically do not
suffer direct financial loss or the inability to earn income as a result of
most power quality problems, but they can be a potent force when they
perceive that the utility is providing poor service. Home computer
usage has increased considerably in the last few years and more trans-
actions are being done over the Internet. Users become more sensitive
to interruptions when they are reliant on this technology. The sheer
number of complaints require utilities to provide staffing to handle
them. Also, public interest groups frequently intervene with public ser-
vice commissions, requiring the utilities to expend financial resources
on lawyers, consultants, studies, and the like to counter the interven-
tion. While all this is certainly not the result of power quality problems,
a reputation for providing poor quality service does not help matters.
Load equipment suppliers generally find themselves in a very com-
petitive market with most customers buying on lowest cost. Thus, there
is a general disincentive to add features to the equipment to withstand
common disturbances unless the customer specifies otherwise. Many
manufacturers are also unaware of the types of disturbances that can
occur on power systems. The primary responsibility for correcting inad-
equacies in load equipment ultimately lies with the end user who must
purchase and operate it. Specifications must include power perfor-
mance criteria. Since many end users are also unaware of the pitfalls,
one useful service that utilities can provide is dissemination of infor-
mation on power quality and the requirements of load equipment to
properly operate in the real world. For instance, the SEMI F-47 stan-
dard previously referenced was developed through joint task forces
Introduction
7
Introduction
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

consisting of semiconductor industry and utility engineers working
together.
1.4
The Power Quality Evaluation
Procedure
Power quality problems encompass a wide range of different phenom-
ena, as described in Chap. 2. Each of these phenomena may have a
variety of different causes and different solutions that can be used to
improve the power quality and equipment performance. However, it is
useful to look at the general steps that are associated with investigat-
ing many of these problems, especially if the steps can involve interac-
tion between the utility supply system and the customer facility. Figure
1.2 gives some general steps that are often required in a power quality
investigation, along with the major considerations that must be
addressed at each step.
The general procedure must also consider whether the evaluation
involves an existing power quality problem or one that could result from
a new design or from proposed changes to the system. Measurements
8
Chapter One
IDENTIFY PROBLEM
CATEGORY
PROBLEM
CHARACTERIZATION
IDENTIFY RANGE
OF SOLUTIONS
EVALUATE
SOLUTIONS
Voltage
Regulation/
Unbalance
Flicker
Transients
Voltage Sags/
Interruptions
Harmonic
Distortion
OPTIMUM
SOLUTION
Measurements/
Data Collection
Causes
Characteristics
Equipment Impacts
Utility
Transmission
System
End-Use
Customer
Interface
End-Use
Customer
System
Utility
Distribution
System
Equipment
Design/
Specifications
Modeling/
Analysis
Procedures
Evaluate Technical
Alternatives
Evaluate Economics of Possible Solutions
POWER QUALITY PROBLEM EVALUATIONS
Figure 1.2
Basic steps involved in a power quality evaluation.
Introduction
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

will play an important role for almost any power quality concern. This
is the primary method of characterizing the problem or the existing sys-
tem that is being evaluated. When performing the measurements, it is
important to record impacts of the power quality variations at the same
time so that problems can be correlated with possible causes.
Solutions need to be evaluated using a system perspective, and both
the economics and the technical limitations must be considered.
Possible solutions are identified at all levels of the system from utility
supply to the end-use equipment being affected. Solutions that are not
technically viable get thrown out, and the rest of the alternatives are
compared on an economic basis. The optimum solution will depend on
the type of problem, the number of end users being impacted, and the
possible solutions.
The overall procedure is introduced here to provide a framework for
the more detailed technical information and procedures that are
described in each chapter of this book. The relative role of simulations
and measurements for evaluating power quality problems is described
separately for each type of power quality phenomenon. The available
solutions and the economics of these solutions are also addressed in the
individual chapters.
1.5
Who Should Use This Book
Power quality issues frequently cross the energy meter boundary
between the utility and the end user. Therefore, this book addresses
issues of interest to both utility engineers and industrial engineers and
technicians. Every attempt has been made to provide a balanced
approach to the presentation of the problems and solutions.
The book should also be of interest to designers of manufacturing
equipment, computers, appliances, and other load equipment. It will
help designers learn about the environment in which their equipment
must operate and the peculiar difficulties their customers might have
when trying to operate their equipment. Hopefully, this book will serve
as common ground on which these three entities—utility, customer,
and equipment supplier—can meet to resolve problems.
This book is intended to serve both as a reference book and a textbook
for utility distribution engineers and key technical personnel with indus-
trial end users. Parts of the book are tutorial in nature for the newcomer
to power quality and power systems, while other parts are very techni-
cal, intended strictly as reference for the experienced practitioner.
1.6
Overview of the Contents
The chapters of the book are organized as follows:
Introduction
9
Introduction
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Chapter 2 provides background material on the different types of
power quality phenomena and describes standard terms and defini-
tions for power quality phenomena.
Chapters 3 through 7 are the heart of the book, describing four major
classes of power quality variations in detail: sags and interruptions,
transients, harmonics, and long-duration voltage variations. The mate-
rial on harmonics has been expanded from the first edition and split
into two chapters. Chapter 5 describes the basic harmonic phenomena,
while Chap. 6 concentrates on methods for dealing with harmonic dis-
tortion.
Chapters 8 and 9 are new with this edition. Chapter 8 describes tech-
niques for benchmarking power quality and how to apply power quality
standards. Important standards dealing with power quality issues, pri-
marily developed by the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC) and the Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE),
are described and referenced in the chapters where they are applicable.
Chapter 8 provides an overview of the overall power quality standards
structure where these standards are headed. Chapter 9 addresses the
subject of distributed generation (DG) interconnected to the distribution
system. There has been renewed interest in DG since the first edition
of this book was published due to changing utility regulatory rules and
new technologies. This chapter discusses the relationship between DG
and power quality.
Chapter 10 provides a concise summary of key wiring and grounding
problems and gives some general guidance on identifying and correct-
ing them. Many power quality problems experienced by end users are
the result of inadequate wiring or incorrect installations. However, the
emphasis of this book is on power quality phenomena that can be
addressed analytically and affect both sides of the meter. This chapter
is included to give power quality engineers a basic understanding of the
principles with respect to power quality issues.
Finally, Chap. 11 provides a guide for site surveys and power quality
monitoring. There have been major advances in power quality moni-
toring technology in recent years. The trend now is toward permanent
monitoring of power quality with continuous Web-based access to infor-
mation. Chapter 11 has been completely updated to address the new
monitoring technologies.
10
Chapter One
Introduction
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

11
Terms and Definitions
2.1
Need for a Consistent Vocabulary
The term power quality is applied to a wide variety of electromagnetic
phenomena on the power system. The increasing application of elec-
tronic equipment and distributed generation has heightened the inter-
est in power quality in recent years, and this has been accompanied by
the development of a special terminology to describe the phenomena.
Unfortunately, this terminology has not been consistent across differ-
ent segments of the industry. This has caused a considerable amount of
confusion as both vendors and end users have struggled to understand
why electrical equipment is not working as expected. Likewise, it is
confusing to wade through the vendor jargon and differentiate between
a myriad of proposed solutions.
Many ambiguous words have been used that have multiple or
unclear meanings. For example, surge is used to describe a wide vari-
ety of disturbances that cause equipment failures or misoperation. A
surge suppressor can suppress some of these but will have absolutely
no effect on others. Terms like glitch and blink that have no technical
meaning at all have crept into the vocabulary. Unscrupulous marketers
take advantage of the ignorance of the general public, selling over-
priced gadgets with near-miraculous claims for improving the power
quality. Of course, this all comes with a money-back guarantee.
Readers can protect themselves by obtaining a better understanding of
power quality vocabulary and insisting on technical explanations of
how a gadget works. Our basic rule: If they won’t tell you what is in the
box and how it works, don’t buy it!
Chapter2
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

This chapter describes a consistent terminology that can be used to
describe power quality variations. We also explain why some commonly
used terminology is inappropriate in power quality discussions.
2.2
General 
Classes 
of 
Power 
Quality
Problems
The terminology presented here reflects recent U.S. and international
efforts to standardize definitions of power quality terms. The IEEE
Standards Coordinating Committee 22 (IEEE SCC22) has led the main
effort in the United States to coordinate power quality standards. It
has the responsibilities across several societies of the IEEE, principally
the Industry Applications Society and the Power Engineering Society.
It coordinates with international efforts through liaisons with the IEC
and the Congress Internationale des Grand Réseaux Électriques a
Haute Tension (CIGRE; in English, International Conference on Large
High-Voltage Electric Systems).
The IEC classifies electromagnetic phenomena into the groups
shown in Table 2.1.1 We will be primarily concerned with the first four
classes in this book.
12
Chapter Two
TABLE 2.1
Principal Phenomena Causing Electromagnetic 
Disturbances as Classified by the IEC
Conducted low-frequency phenomena
Harmonics, interharmonics
Signal systems (power line carrier)
Voltage fluctuations (flicker)
Voltage dips and interruptions
Voltage imbalance (unbalance)
Power frequency variations
Induced low-frequency voltages
DC in ac networks
Radiated low-frequency phenomena
Magnetic fields
Electric fields
Conducted high-frequency phenomena
Induced continuous-wave (CW) voltages or currents
Unidirectional transients
Oscillatory transients
Radiated high-frequency phenomena
Magnetic fields
Electric fields
Electromagnetic fields
Continuous waves
Transients
Electrostatic discharge phenomena (ESD)
Nuclear electromagnetic pulse (NEMP)
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

U.S. power industry efforts to develop recommended practices for
monitoring electric power quality have added a few terms to the IEC
terminology.2 Sag is used as a synonym to the IEC term dip. The cate-
gory short-duration variations is used to refer to voltage dips and short
interruptions. The term swell is introduced as an inverse to sag (dip).
The category long-duration variation has been added to deal with
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) C84.1 limits. The cate-
gory noise has been added to deal with broadband conducted phenom-
ena. The category waveform distortion is used as a container category
for the IEC harmonics, interharmonics, and dc in ac networks phe-
nomena as well as an additional phenomenon from IEEE Standard
519-1992, Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic
Control in Electrical Power Systems, called notching.
Table 2.2 shows the categorization of electromagnetic phenomena
used for the power quality community. The phenomena listed in the
table can be described further by listing appropriate attributes. For
steady-state phenomena, the following attributes can be used1:
■Amplitude
■Frequency
■Spectrum
■Modulation
■Source impedance
■Notch depth
■Notch area
For non-steady-state phenomena, other attributes may be required1:
■Rate of rise
■Amplitude
■Duration
■Spectrum
■Frequency
■Rate of occurrence
■Energy potential
■Source impedance
Table 2.2 provides information regarding typical spectral content,
duration, and magnitude where appropriate for each category of elec-
tromagnetic phenomena.1,4,5 The categories of the table, when used
with the attributes previously mentioned, provide a means to clearly
Terms and Definitions
13
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

describe an electromagnetic disturbance. The categories and their
descriptions are important in order to be able to classify measurement
results and to describe electromagnetic phenomena which can cause
power quality problems.
14
Chapter Two
TABLE 2.2
Categories and Characteristics of Power System Electromagnetic
Phenomena
Typical spectral 
Typical
Typical voltage
Categories
content
duration
magnitude
1.0
Transients
1.1
Impulsive
1.1.1
Nanosecond
5-ns rise
<50 ns
1.1.2
Microsecond
1-s rise
50 ns–1 ms
1.1.3
Millisecond
0.1-ms rise
>1 ms
1.2
Oscillatory
1.2.1
Low frequency
<5 kHz
0.3–50 ms
0–4 pu
1.2.2
Medium frequency
5–500 kHz
20 s
0–8 pu
1.2.3
High frequency
0.5–5 MHz
5 s
0–4 pu
2.0
Short-duration variations
2.1
Instantaneous
2.1.1
Interruption
0.5–30 cycles
<0.1 pu
2.1.2
Sag (dip)
0.5–30 cycles
0.1–0.9 pu
2.1.3
Swell
0.5–30 cycles
1.1–1.8 pu
2.2
Momentary
2.2.1
Interruption
30 cycles–3 s
<0.1 pu
2.2.2
Sag (dip)
30 cycles–3 s
0.1–0.9 pu
2.2.3
Swell
30 cycles–3 s
1.1–1.4 pu
2.3
Temporary
2.3.1
Interruption
3 s–1 min
<0.1 pu
2.3.2
Sag (dip)
3 s–1 min
0.1–0.9 pu
2.3.3
Swell
3 s–1 min
1.1–1.2 pu
3.0
Long-duration variations
3.1
Interruption, sustained
>1 min
0.0 pu
3.2
Undervoltages
>1 min
0.8–0.9 pu
3.3
Overvoltages
>1 min
1.1–1.2 pu
4.0
Voltage unbalance
Steady state
0.5–2%
5.0
Waveform distortion
5.1
DC offset
Steady state
0–0.1%
5.2
Harmonics
0–100th harmonic
Steady state
0–20%
5.3
Interharmonics
0–6 kHz
Steady state
0–2%
5.4
Notching
Steady state
5.5
Noise
Broadband
Steady state
0–1%
6.0
Voltage fluctuations
<25 Hz
Intermittent
0.1–7%
0.2–2 Pst
7.0
Power frequency 
variations
<10 s
NOTE: s  second, ns  nanosecond, s  microsecond, ms  millisecond, kHz  kilohertz,
MHz  megahertz, min  minute, pu  per unit.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2.3
Transients
The term transients has long been used in the analysis of power system
variations to denote an event that is undesirable and momentary in
nature. The notion of a damped oscillatory transient due to an RLC
network is probably what most power engineers think of when they
hear the word transient.
Other definitions in common use are broad in scope and simply state
that a transient is “that part of the change in a variable that disappears
during transition from one steady state operating condition to
another.”8 Unfortunately, this definition could be used to describe just
about anything unusual that happens on the power system.
Another word in common usage that is often considered synonymous
with transient is surge. A utility engineer may think of a surge as the
transient resulting from a lightning stroke for which a surge arrester
is used for protection. End users frequently use the word indiscrimi-
nantly to describe anything unusual that might be observed on the
power supply ranging from sags to swells to interruptions. Because
there are many potential ambiguities with this word in the power qual-
ity field, we will generally avoid using it unless we have specifically
defined what it refers to.
Broadly speaking, transients can be classified into two categories,
impulsive and oscillatory. These terms reflect the waveshape of a current
or voltage transient. We will describe these two categories in more detail.
2.3.1
Impulsive transient
An impulsive transient is a sudden, non–power frequency change in the
steady-state condition of voltage, current, or both that is unidirectional
in polarity (primarily either positive or negative).
Impulsive transients are normally characterized by their rise and
decay times, which can also be revealed by their spectral content. For
example, a 1.2  50-s 2000-volt (V) impulsive transient nominally
rises from zero to its peak value of 2000 V in 1.2 s and then decays to
half its peak value in 50 s. The most common cause of impulsive tran-
sients is lightning. Figure 2.1 illustrates a typical current impulsive
transient caused by lightning.
Because of the high frequencies involved, the shape of impulsive
transients can be changed quickly by circuit components and may have
significantly different characteristics when viewed from different parts
of the power system. They are generally not conducted far from the
source of where they enter the power system, although they may, in
some cases, be conducted for quite some distance along utility lines.
Impulsive transients can excite the natural frequency of power system
circuits and produce oscillatory transients.
Terms and Definitions
15
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2.3.2
Oscillatory transient
An oscillatory transient is a sudden, non–power frequency change in
the steady-state condition of voltage, current, or both, that includes
both positive and negative polarity values.
An oscillatory transient consists of a voltage or current whose instan-
taneous value changes polarity rapidly. It is described by its spectral
content (predominate frequency), duration, and magnitude. The spec-
tral content subclasses defined in Table 2.2 are high, medium, and low
frequency. The frequency ranges for these classifications are chosen to
coincide with common types of power system oscillatory transient phe-
nomena.
Oscillatory transients with a primary frequency component greater
than 500 kHz and a typical duration measured in microseconds (or sev-
eral cycles of the principal frequency) are considered high-frequency
transients. These transients are often the result of a local system
response to an impulsive transient.
A transient with a primary frequency component between 5 and 500
kHz with duration measured in the tens of microseconds (or several
cycles of the principal frequency) is termed a medium-frequency transient.
Back-to-back capacitor energization results in oscillatory transient
currents in the tens of kilohertz as illustrated in Fig. 2.2. Cable switch-
ing results in oscillatory voltage transients in the same frequency
range. Medium-frequency transients can also be the result of a system
response to an impulsive transient.
16
Chapter Two
–25
–20
–15
–10
–5
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Current (kA)
Time (s)
Figure 2.1
Lightning stroke current impulsive transient.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

A transient with a primary frequency component less than 5 kHz,
and a duration from 0.3 to 50 ms, is considered a low-frequency tran-
sient. This category of phenomena is frequently encountered on utility
subtransmission and distribution systems and is caused by many types
of events. The most frequent is capacitor bank energization, which typ-
ically results in an oscillatory voltage transient with a primary fre-
quency between 300 and 900 Hz. The peak magnitude can approach 2.0
pu, but is typically 1.3 to 1.5 pu with a duration of between 0.5 and 3
cycles depending on the system damping (Fig. 2.3).
Oscillatory transients with principal frequencies less than 300 Hz
can also be found on the distribution system. These are generally asso-
ciated with ferroresonance and transformer energization (Fig. 2.4).
Transients involving series capacitors could also fall into this category.
They occur when the system responds by resonating with low-fre-
quency components in the transformer inrush current (second and
third harmonic) or when unusual conditions result in ferroresonance.
It is also possible to categorize transients (and other disturbances)
according to their mode. Basically, a transient in a three-phase system
with a separate neutral conductor can be either common mode or nor-
mal mode, depending on whether it appears between line or neutral
and ground, or between line and neutral.
2.4
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Long-duration variations encompass root-mean-square (rms) devia-
tions at power frequencies for longer than 1 min. ANSI C84.1 specifies
the steady-state voltage tolerances expected on a power system. A volt-
Terms and Definitions
17
8
10
12
4
–7500
–5000
–2500
0
 2500
 5000
 7500
Time (ms)
Current (A)
Figure 2.2
Oscillatory transient current caused by back-to-back capacitor switching.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

age variation is considered to be long duration when the ANSI limits
are exceeded for greater than 1 min.
Long-duration variations can be either overvoltages or undervolt-
ages. Overvoltages and undervoltages generally are not the result of
system faults, but are caused by load variations on the system and sys-
tem switching operations. Such variations are typically displayed as
plots of rms voltage versus time.
18
Chapter Two
  0
 20
 40
 60
 80
100
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
 0.0
 0.5
 1.0
 1.5
 2.0
Time (ms)
Voltage (V pu)
0
 200
 400
 600
 800
1000
–600000
–400000
–200000
0
 200000
 400000
 600000
Time (ms)
Voltage (V)
Figure 2.3
Low-frequency oscillatory transient caused by capacitor bank energization.
34.5-kV bus voltage.
Figure 2.4
Low-frequency oscillatory transient caused by ferroresonance of an unloaded
transformer.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2.4.1
Overvoltage
An overvoltage is an increase in the rms ac voltage greater than 110
percent at the power frequency for a duration longer than 1 min.
Overvoltages are usually the result of load switching (e.g., switching
off a large load or energizing a capacitor bank). The overvoltages result
because either the system is too weak for the desired voltage regulation
or voltage controls are inadequate. Incorrect tap settings on trans-
formers can also result in system overvoltages.
2.4.2
Undervoltage
An undervoltage is a decrease in the rms ac voltage to less than 90 per-
cent at the power frequency for a duration longer than 1 min.
Undervoltages are the result of switching events that are the
opposite of the events that cause overvoltages. A load switching on
or a capacitor bank switching off can cause an undervoltage until
voltage regulation equipment on the system can bring the voltage
back to within tolerances. Overloaded circuits can result in under-
voltages also.
The term brownout is often used to describe sustained periods of
undervoltage initiated as a specific utility dispatch strategy to reduce
power demand. Because there is no formal definition for brownout and
it is not as clear as the term undervoltage when trying to characterize
a disturbance, the term brownout should be avoided.
2.4.3
Sustained interruptions
When the supply voltage has been zero for a period of time in excess of
1 min, the long-duration voltage variation is considered a sustained
interruption. Voltage interruptions longer than 1 min are often per-
manent and require human intervention to repair the system for
restoration. The term sustained interruption refers to specific power
system phenomena and, in general, has no relation to the usage of the
term outage. Utilities use outage or interruption to describe phenom-
ena of similar nature for reliability reporting purposes. However, this
causes confusion for end users who think of an outage as any inter-
ruption of power that shuts down a process. This could be as little as
one-half of a cycle. Outage, as defined in IEEE Standard 100,8 does not
refer to a specific phenomenon, but rather to the state of a component
in a system that has failed to function as expected. Also, use of the
term interruption in the context of power quality monitoring has no
relation to reliability or other continuity of service statistics. Thus,
this term has been defined to be more specific regarding the absence
of voltage for long periods.
Terms and Definitions
19
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2.5
Short-Duration Voltage Variations
This category encompasses the IEC category of voltage dips and short
interruptions. Each type of variation can be designated as instanta-
neous, momentary, or temporary, depending on its duration as defined
in Table 2.2.
Short-duration voltage variations are caused by fault conditions, the
energization of large loads which require high starting currents, or
intermittent loose connections in power wiring. Depending on the fault
location and the system conditions, the fault can cause either tempo-
rary voltage drops (sags), voltage rises (swells), or a complete loss of
voltage (interruptions). The fault condition can be close to or remote
from the point of interest. In either case, the impact on the voltage dur-
ing the actual fault condition is of the short-duration variation until
protective devices operate to clear the fault.
2.5.1
Interruption
An interruption occurs when the supply voltage or load current
decreases to less than 0.1 pu for a period of time not exceeding 1 min.
Interruptions can be the result of power system faults, equipment
failures, and control malfunctions. The interruptions are measured by
their duration since the voltage magnitude is always less than 10 per-
cent of nominal. The duration of an interruption due to a fault on the
utility system is determined by the operating time of utility protective
devices. Instantaneous reclosing generally will limit the interruption
caused by a nonpermanent fault to less than 30 cycles. Delayed reclos-
ing of the protective device may cause a momentary or temporary inter-
ruption. The duration of an interruption due to equipment malfunctions
or loose connections can be irregular.
Some interruptions may be preceded by a voltage sag when these
interruptions are due to faults on the source system. The voltage sag
occurs between the time a fault initiates and the protective device oper-
ates. Figure 2.5 shows such a momentary interruption during which
voltage on one phase sags to about 20 percent for about 3 cycles and
then drops to zero for about 1.8 s until the recloser closes back in.
2.5.2
Sags (dips)
A sag is a decrease to between 0.1 and 0.9 pu in rms voltage or current
at the power frequency for durations from 0.5 cycle to 1 min.
The power quality community has used the term sag for many years
to describe a short-duration voltage decrease. Although the term has not
been formally defined, it has been increasingly accepted and used by
20
Chapter Two
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

utilities, manufacturers, and end users. The IEC definition for this phe-
nomenon is dip. The two terms are considered interchangeable, with
sag being the preferred synonym in the U.S. power quality community.
Terminology used to describe the magnitude of a voltage sag is often
confusing. A “20 percent sag” can refer to a sag which results in a volt-
age of 0.8 or 0.2 pu. The preferred terminology would be one that leaves
no doubt as to the resulting voltage level: “a sag to 0.8 pu” or “a sag
whose magnitude was 20 percent.” When not specified otherwise, a 20
percent sag will be considered an event during which the rms voltage
decreased by 20 percent to 0.8 pu. The nominal, or base, voltage level
should also be specified.
Voltage sags are usually associated with system faults but can also
be caused by energization of heavy loads or starting of large motors.
Figure 2.6 shows a typical voltage sag that can be associated with a sin-
gle-line-to-ground (SLG) fault on another feeder from the same substa-
tion. An 80 percent sag exists for about 3 cycles until the substation
breaker is able to interrupt the fault current. Typical fault clearing
times range from 3 to 30 cycles, depending on the fault current magni-
tude and the type of overcurrent protection.
Figure 2.7 illustrates the effect of a large motor starting. An induc-
tion motor will draw 6 to 10 times its full load current during start-up.
If the current magnitude is large relative to the available fault current
in the system at that point, the resulting voltage sag can be significant.
In this case, the voltage sags immediately to 80 percent and then grad-
Terms and Definitions
21
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Time (s)
Voltage (V)
Figure 2.5
Three-phase rms voltages for a momentary interruption due to a fault and
subsequent recloser operation.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

22
Chapter Two
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Time (s)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Time (s)
Voltage (V pu)
Voltage (V pu)
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6
Voltage sag caused by an SLG fault. (a) RMS waveform for voltage
sag event. (b) Voltage sag waveform.
Phase A-B Voltage
RMS Variation
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
Duration
3.200 s
Min
79.38
Ave
87.99
Max
101.2
Time (s)
Voltage (%)
Figure 2.7
Temporary voltage sag caused by motor starting.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ually returns to normal in about 3 s. Note the difference in time frame
between this and sags due to utility system faults.
Until recent efforts, the duration of sag events has not been clearly
defined. Typical sag duration is defined in some publications as rang-
ing from 2 ms (about one-tenth of a cycle) to a couple of minutes.
Undervoltages that last less than one-half cycle cannot be character-
ized effectively by a change in the rms value of the fundamental fre-
quency value. Therefore, these events are considered transients.
Undervoltages that last longer than 1 min can typically be controlled
by voltage regulation equipment and may be associated with causes
other than system faults. Therefore, these are classified as long-dura-
tion variations.
Sag durations are subdivided here into three categories—instanta-
neous, momentary, and temporary—which coincide with the three
categories of interruptions and swells. These durations are intended
to correspond to typical utility protective device operation times as
well as duration divisions recommended by international technical
organizations.5
2.5.3
Swells
A swell is defined as an increase to between 1.1 and 1.8 pu in rms voltage
or current at the power frequency for durations from 0.5 cycle to 1 min.
As with sags, swells are usually associated with system fault condi-
tions, but they are not as common as voltage sags. One way that a swell
can occur is from the temporary voltage rise on the unfaulted phases
during an SLG fault. Figure 2.8 illustrates a voltage swell caused by an
SLG fault. Swells can also be caused by switching off a large load or
energizing a large capacitor bank.
Swells are characterized by their magnitude (rms value) and dura-
tion. The severity of a voltage swell during a fault condition is a func-
tion of the fault location, system impedance, and grounding. On an
ungrounded system, with an infinite zero-sequence impedance, the
line-to-ground voltages on the ungrounded phases will be 1.73 pu dur-
ing an SLG fault condition. Close to the substation on a grounded sys-
tem, there will be little or no voltage rise on the unfaulted phases
because the substation transformer is usually connected delta-wye,
providing a low-impedance zero-sequence path for the fault current.
Faults at different points along four-wire, multigrounded feeders will
have varying degrees of voltage swells on the unfaulted phases. A 15
percent swell, like that shown in Fig. 2.8, is common on U.S. utility
feeders.
The term momentary overvoltage is used by many writers as a syn-
onym for the term swell.
Terms and Definitions
23
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2.6
Voltage Imbalance
Voltage imbalance (also called voltage unbalance) is sometimes defined
as the maximum deviation from the average of the three-phase volt-
ages or currents, divided by the average of the three-phase voltages or
currents, expressed in percent.
Imbalance is more rigorously defined in the standards6,8,11,12 using
symmetrical components. The ratio of either the negative- or zero-
sequence component to the positive-sequence component can be used
to specify the percent unbalance. The most recent standards11 specify
that the negative-sequence method be used. Figure 2.9 shows an
example of these two ratios for a 1-week trend of imbalance on a res-
idential feeder.
The primary source of voltage unbalances of less than 2 percent is
single-phase loads on a three-phase circuit. Voltage unbalance can also
be the result of blown fuses in one phase of a three-phase capacitor
bank. Severe voltage unbalance (greater than 5 percent) can result
from single-phasing conditions.
2.7
Waveform Distortion
Waveform distortion is defined as a steady-state deviation from an
ideal sine wave of power frequency principally characterized by the
spectral content of the deviation.
24
Chapter Two
– 0.5
– 1.0
– 1.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Voltage (pu)
Time (s)
Figure 2.8
Instantaneous voltage swell caused by an SLG fault.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

There are five primary types of waveform distortion:
■DC offset
■Harmonics
■Interharmonics
■Notching
■Noise
DC offset.
The presence of a dc voltage or current in an ac power system
is termed dc offset. This can occur as the result of a geomagnetic distur-
bance or asymmetry of electronic power converters. Incandescent light
bulb life extenders, for example, may consist of diodes that reduce the
rms voltage supplied to the light bulb by half-wave rectification. Direct
current in ac networks can have a detrimental effect by biasing trans-
former cores so they saturate in normal operation. This causes addi-
tional heating and loss of transformer life. Direct current may also cause
the electrolytic erosion of grounding electrodes and other connectors.
Harmonics.
Harmonics are sinusoidal voltages or currents having fre-
quencies that are integer multiples of the frequency at which the sup-
Terms and Definitions
25
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Mon
V0/V1
V2/V1
Voltage Unbalance (%)
V0/V1
V2/V1
Figure 2.9
Voltage unbalance trend for a residential feeder.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ply system is designed to operate (termed the fundamental frequency;
usually 50 or 60 Hz).6 Periodically distorted waveforms can be decom-
posed into a sum of the fundamental frequency and the harmonics.
Harmonic distortion originates in the nonlinear characteristics of
devices and loads on the power system.
Harmonic distortion levels are described by the complete harmonic
spectrum with magnitudes and phase angles of each individual har-
monic component. It is also common to use a single quantity, the total
harmonic distortion (THD), as a measure of the effective value of har-
monic distortion. Figure 2.10 illustrates the waveform and harmonic
spectrum for a typical adjustable-speed-drive (ASD) input current.
Current distortion levels can be characterized by a THD value, as pre-
viously described, but this can often be misleading. For example, many
26
Chapter Two
0
600
1200
1800
DERIVED>VSRCA-BUSA  (Type 9)(2) 
0
5
10
15
20
Frequency (Hz)
Freq:
THD :
RMSh:
RMS :
ASUM:
TIF :
IT  :
60
19.4713
Fund:
41.0054
7.98431
21.0448
37.3698
427.213
8990.61
PWMASD45>VSRCA-BUSA  (Type 9) 
40
50
60
70
80
–50
–30
–10
10
30
50
70
Time (ms)
Current (A)
Current (A)
Max:
Min:
Avg:
Abs:
RMS:
CF :
FF :
313.907
–171.704
33.5332
313.907
64.3862
4.87537
1.92007
ASD Input Current Spectrum
Figure 2.10
Current waveform and harmonic spectrum for an ASD input current.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

adjustable-speed drives will exhibit high THD values for the input cur-
rent when they are operating at very light loads. This is not necessar-
ily a significant concern because the magnitude of harmonic current is
low, even though its relative distortion is high.
To handle this concern for characterizing harmonic currents in a con-
sistent fashion, IEEE Standard 519-1992 defines another term, the
total demand distortion (TDD). This term is the same as the total har-
monic distortion except that the distortion is expressed as a percent of
some rated load current rather than as a percent of the fundamental
current magnitude at the instant of measurement. IEEE Standard
519-1992 provides guidelines for harmonic current and voltage distor-
tion levels on distribution and transmission circuits.
Interharmonics.
Voltages or currents having frequency components
that are not integer multiples of the frequency at which the supply sys-
tem is designed to operate (e.g., 50 or 60 Hz) are called interharmonics.
They can appear as discrete frequencies or as a wideband spectrum.
Interharmonics can be found in networks of all voltage classes. The
main sources of interharmonic waveform distortion are static frequency
converters, cycloconverters, induction furnaces, and arcing devices.
Power line carrier signals can also be considered as interharmonics.
Since the first edition of this book, considerable work has been done
on this subject. There is now a better understanding of the origins and
effects of interharmonic distortion. It is generally the result of fre-
quency conversion and is often not constant; it varies with load. Such
interharmonic currents can excite quite severe resonances on the
power system as the varying interharmonic frequency becomes coinci-
dent with natural frequencies of the system. They have been shown to
affect power-line-carrier signaling and induce visual flicker in fluores-
cent and other arc lighting as well as in computer display devices.
Notching.
Notching is a periodic voltage disturbance caused by the
normal operation of power electronic devices when current is commu-
tated from one phase to another.
Since notching occurs continuously, it can be characterized through
the harmonic spectrum of the affected voltage. However, it is generally
treated as a special case. The frequency components associated with
notching can be quite high and may not be readily characterized with
measurement equipment normally used for harmonic analysis.
Figure 2.11 shows an example of voltage notching from a three-phase
converter that produces continuous dc current. The notches occur when
the current commutates from one phase to another. During this period,
there is a momentary short circuit between two phases, pulling the
voltage as close to zero as permitted by system impedances.
Terms and Definitions
27
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Noise.
Noise is defined as unwanted electrical signals with broadband
spectral content lower than 200 kHz superimposed upon the power sys-
tem voltage or current in phase conductors, or found on neutral con-
ductors or signal lines.
Noise in power systems can be caused by power electronic devices,
control circuits, arcing equipment, loads with solid-state rectifiers, and
switching power supplies. Noise problems are often exacerbated by
improper grounding that fails to conduct noise away from the power
system. Basically, noise consists of any unwanted distortion of the
power signal that cannot be classified as harmonic distortion or tran-
sients. Noise disturbs electronic devices such as microcomputer and
programmable controllers. The problem can be mitigated by using fil-
ters, isolation transformers, and line conditioners.
2.8
Voltage Fluctuation
Voltage fluctuations are systematic variations of the voltage envelope
or a series of random voltage changes, the magnitude of which does not
normally exceed the voltage ranges specified by ANSI C84.1 of 0.9 to
1.1 pu.
IEC 61000-2-1 defines various types of voltage fluctuations. We will
restrict our discussion here to IEC 61000-2-1 Type (d) voltage fluctua-
tions, which are characterized as a series of random or continuous volt-
age fluctuations.
Loads that can exhibit continuous, rapid variations in the load cur-
rent magnitude can cause voltage variations that are often referred to
as flicker. The term flicker is derived from the impact of the voltage
fluctuation on lamps such that they are perceived by the human eye to
flicker. To be technically correct, voltage fluctuation is an electromag-
netic phenomenon while flicker is an undesirable result of the voltage
28
Chapter Two
Figure 2.11
Example of voltage notching caused by a three-phase converter.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

fluctuation in some loads. However, the two terms are often linked
together in standards. Therefore, we will also use the common term
voltage flicker to describe such voltage fluctuations.
An example of a voltage waveform which produces flicker is shown in
Fig. 2.12. This is caused by an arc furnace, one of the most common
causes of voltage fluctuations on utility transmission and distribution
systems. The flicker signal is defined by its rms magnitude expressed
as a percent of the fundamental. Voltage flicker is measured with
respect to the sensitivity of the human eye. Typically, magnitudes as
low as 0.5 percent can result in perceptible lamp flicker if the frequen-
cies are in the range of 6 to 8 Hz.
IEC 61000-4-15 defines the methodology and specifications of instru-
mentation for measuring flicker. The IEEE Voltage Flicker Working
Group has recently agreed to adopt this standard as amended for 60-
Hz power systems for use in North America. This standard devises a
simple means of describing the potential for visible light flicker
through voltage measurements. The measurement method simulates
the lamp/eye/brain transfer function and produces a fundamental met-
ric called short-term flicker sensation (Pst). This value is normalized to
1.0 to represent the level of voltage fluctuations sufficient to cause
noticeable flicker to 50 percent of a sample observing group. Another
measure called long-term flicker sensation (Plt) is often used for the
Terms and Definitions
29
0
2
4
6
8
10
Phase A Voltage 10 31 00 06:56:59 am
Time (s)
Voltage (V)
128600
128800
129000
129200
129400
129600
129800
Figure 2.12
Example of voltage fluctuations caused by arc furnace operation.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

purpose of verifying compliance with compatibility levels established
by standards bodies and used in utility power contracts. This value is
a longer-term average of Pst samples.
Figure 2.13 illustrates a trend of Pst measurements taken at a 161-
kV substation bus serving an arc furnace load. Pst samples are nor-
mally reported at 10-min intervals. A statistical evaluation process
defined in the measurement standard processes instantaneous flicker
measurements to produce the Pst value. The Plt value is produced
every 2 h from the Pst values.
2.9
Power Frequency Variations
Power frequency variations are defined as the deviation of the power
system fundamental frequency from it specified nominal value (e.g., 50
or 60 Hz).
The power system frequency is directly related to the rotational
speed of the generators supplying the system. There are slight varia-
tions in frequency as the dynamic balance between load and generation
changes. The size of the frequency shift and its duration depend on the
load characteristics and the response of the generation control system
to load changes. Figure 2.14 illustrates frequency variations for a 24-h
period on a typical 13-kV substation bus.
Frequency variations that go outside of accepted limits for normal
steady-state operation of the power system can be caused by faults on
the bulk power transmission system, a large block of load being dis-
connected, or a large source of generation going off-line.
On modern interconnected power systems, significant frequency
variations are rare. Frequency variations of consequence are much
more likely to occur for loads that are supplied by a generator isolated
from the utility system. In such cases, governor response to abrupt load
changes may not be adequate to regulate within the narrow bandwidth
required by frequency-sensitive equipment.
30
Chapter Two
03/21/2002
00:00:00.00
4:00
8:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
03/22/2002
00:00:00.00
Time
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Pst
Short-Term Flicker A
Figure 2.13
Flicker (Pst) at 161-kV substation bus measured according to IEC Standard
61000-4-15. (Courtesy of Dranetz-BMI/Electrotek Concepts.)
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Voltage notching can sometimes be mistaken for frequency deviation.
The notches may come sufficiently close to zero to cause errors in
instruments and control systems that rely on zero crossings to derive
frequency or time.
2.10
Power Quality Terms
So that you will be better able to understand the material in this book, we
have included the definitions of many common power quality terms that
are relevant to the material in this book. For the most part, these defini-
tions coincide with current industry efforts to define power quality terms.2
We have also included other terms relevant to the material in this book.
active filter
Any of a number of sophisticated power electronic devices for
eliminating harmonic distortion. See passive filter. 
CBEMA curve
A set of curves representing the withstand capabilities of com-
puters in terms of the magnitude and duration of the voltage disturbance.
Developed by the Computer Business Equipment Manufacturers Association
(CBEMA), it had become the de facto standard for measuring the performance
of all types of equipment and power systems and is commonly referred to by
this name.9 CBEMA has been replaced by the Information Technology Industry
Terms and Definitions
31
03-21-2002
00:00:00.00
4:00
8:00
12:00
16:00
20:00
Time
03-22-2002
00:00:00.00
60.05
60
59.95
59.9
LCUBSub
LCUBSub
Hz
Frequency A Minimum
Frequency A Average
Frequency A Average Cumulative Probability
Frequency A Maximum
Frequency A Average
59.951
59.953
59.955
59.957
59.959
59.961
59.963
59.965
59.967
59.969
59.971
59.973
59.975
59.977
59.979
59.981
59.983
59.985
59.987
59.989
59.991
59.993
59.995
59.997
59.999
60.001
60.003
60.005
60.007
60.009
60.011
60.013
60.015
60.017
60.019
60.021
60.023
60.025
60.027
60.029
0
5
10
15
20
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Cumulative Probability (%)
Hz
Samples: 286
Minimum: 59.951 Hz
Average: 60.0 Hz
Maximum: 60.03 Hz
03-21-2002 00:00:00.00
03-22-2002 00:00:00.00
Frequency Voltage A
Count
Figure 2.14
Power frequency trend and statistical distribution at 13-kV substation
bus. (Courtesy of Dranetz-BMI/Electrotek Concepts.)
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Council (ITI), and a new curve has been developed that is commonly referred
to as the ITI curve. See ITI curve.
common mode voltage
The noise voltage that appears equally from current-
carrying conductor to ground.2
coupling
A circuit element, or elements, or a network that may be considered
common to the input mesh and the output mesh and through which energy may
be transferred from one to another.8
crest factor
A value reported by many power quality monitoring instruments
representing the ratio of the crest value of the measured waveform to the root
mean square of the fundamental. For example, the crest factor of a sinusoidal
wave is 1.414.
critical load
Devices and equipment whose failure to operate satisfactorily
jeopardizes the health or safety of personnel, and/or results in loss of function,
financial loss, or damage to property deemed critical by the user.
current distortion
Distortion in the ac line current. See distortion.
differential mode voltage
The voltage between any two of a specified set of
active conductors.
dip
See sag.
distortion
Any deviation from the normal sine wave for an ac quantity.
distributed generation (DG)
Generation dispersed throughout the power sys-
tem as opposed to large, central station power plants. In the context used in
this book, DG typically refers to units less than 10 megawatts (MW) in size that
are interconnected with the distribution system rather than the transmission
system.
dropout
A loss of equipment operation (discrete data signals) due to noise,
sag, or interruption.
dropout voltage
The voltage at which a device will release to its deenergized
position (for this document, the voltage at which a device fails to operate).
electromagnetic compatibility
The ability of a device, equipment, or system to
function satisfactorily in its electromagnetic environment without introducing
intolerable electromagnetic disturbances to anything in that environment.2,3
equipment grounding conductor
The conductor used to connect the
non–current carrying parts of conduits, raceways, and equipment enclosures
to the grounded conductor (neutral) and the grounding electrode at the service
equipment (main panel) or secondary of a separately derived system (e.g., iso-
lation transformer). See National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70-1993,
Section 100.7
failure mode
The effect by which failure is observed.8
32
Chapter Two
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

fast tripping
Refers to the common utility protective relaying practice in
which the circuit breaker or line recloser operates faster than a fuse can blow.
Also called fuse saving. Effective for clearing transient faults without a sus-
tained interruption, but is somewhat controversial because industrial loads are
subjected to a momentary or temporary interruption.
fault
Generally refers to a short circuit on the power system.
fault, transient
A short circuit on the power system usually induced by light-
ning, tree branches, or animals, which can be cleared by momentarily inter-
rupting the current.
ferroresonance
An irregular, often chaotic type of resonance that involves the
nonlinear characteristic of iron-core (ferrous) inductors. It is nearly always unde-
sirable when it occurs in the power delivery system, but it is exploited in tech-
nologies such as constant-voltage transformers to improve the power quality.
flicker
An impression of unsteadiness of visual sensation induced by a light
stimulus whose luminance or spectral distribution fluctuates with time.2
frequency deviation
An increase or decrease in the power frequency. The
duration of a frequency deviation can be from several cycles to several hours.
frequency response
In power quality usage, generally refers to the variation
of impedance of the system, or a metering transducer, as a function of frequency.
fundamental (component)
The component of order 1 (50 to 60 Hz) of the
Fourier series of a periodic quantity.2
ground
A conducting connection, whether intentional or accidental, by which
an electric circuit or electrical equipment is connected to the earth, or to some
conducting body of relatively large extent that serves in place of the earth. Note:
It is used for establishing and maintaining the potential of the earth (or of the
conducting body) or approximately that potential, on conductors connected to it,
and for conducting ground currents to and from earth (or the conducting body).8
ground electrode
A conductor or group of conductors in intimate contact with
the earth for the purpose of providing a connection with the ground.7
ground grid
A system of interconnected bare conductors arranged in a pattern
over a specified area and on or buried below the surface of the earth. The primary
purpose of the ground grid is to provide safety for workers by limiting potential dif-
ferences within its perimeter to safe levels in case of high currents that could flow
if the circuit being worked became energized for any reason or if an adjacent ener-
gized circuit faulted. Metallic surface mats and gratings are sometimes utilized for
the same purpose.8 This is not necessarily the same as a signal reference grid.
ground loop
A potentially detrimental loop formed when two or more points
in an electrical system that are nominally at ground potential are connected by
a conducting path such that either or both points are not at the same ground
potential.8
Terms and Definitions
33
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ground window
The area through which all grounding conductors, including
metallic raceways, enter a specific area. It is often used in communications sys-
tems through which the building grounding system is connected to an area that
would otherwise have no grounding connection.
harmonic (component)
A component of order greater than 1 of the Fourier
series of a periodic quantity.2
harmonic content
The quantity obtained by subtracting the fundamental
component from an alternating quantity.
harmonic distortion
Periodic distortion of the sine wave. See distortion and
total harmonic distortion (THD).
harmonic filter
On power systems, a device for filtering one or more harmon-
ics from the power system. Most are passive combinations of inductance, capac-
itance, and resistance. Newer technologies include active filters that can also
address reactive power needs.
harmonic number
The integral number given by the ratio of the frequency of
a harmonic to the fundamental frequency.2
harmonic resonance
A condition in which the power system is resonating
near one of the major harmonics being produced by nonlinear elements in the
system, thus exacerbating the harmonic distortion.
impulse
A pulse that, for a given application, approximates a unit pulse or a
Dirac function.2 When used in relation to monitoring power quality, it is prefer-
able to use the term impulsive transient in place of impulse.
impulsive transient
A sudden, nonpower frequency change in the steady-
state condition of voltage or current that is unidirectional in polarity (primar-
ily either positive or negative).
instantaneous
When used to quantify the duration of a short-duration vari-
ation as a modifier, this term refers to a time range from one-half cycle to 30
cycles of the power frequency.
instantaneous reclosing
A term commonly applied to reclosing of a utility
breaker as quickly as possible after an interrupting fault current. Typical times
are 18 to 30 cycles.
interharmonic (component)
A frequency component of a periodic quantity
that is not an integer multiple of the frequency at which the supply system is
designed to operate (e.g., 50 or 60 Hz).
interruption, momentary (electrical power systems)
An interruption of a
duration limited to the period required to restore service by automatic or super-
visory-controlled switching operations or by manual switching at locations
where an operator is immediately available. Note: Such switching operations
must be completed in a specified time not to exceed 5 min.
34
Chapter Two
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

interruption, momentary (power quality monitoring)
A type of short-duration
variation. The complete loss of voltage (<0.1 pu) on one or more phase conduc-
tors for a time period between 30 cycles and 3 s.
interruption, sustained (electrical power systems)
Any interruption not
classified as a momentary interruption.
interruption, sustained (power quality)
A type of long-duration variation.
The complete loss of voltage (<0.1 pu) on one or more phase conductors for a
time greater than 1 min.
interruption, temporary
A type of short-duration variation. The complete loss
of voltage (<0.1 pu) on one or more phase conductors for a time period between
3 s and 1 min.
inverter
A power electronic device that converts direct current to alternating
current of either power frequency or a frequency required by an industrial
process. Common inverters today employ pulse-width modulation to create the
desired frequency with minimal harmonic distortion.
islanding
Refers to a condition in which distributed generation is isolated on
a portion of the load served by the utility power system. It is usually an unde-
sirable situation, although there are situations where controlled islands can
improve the system reliability.
isolated ground
An insulated equipment grounding conductor run in the
same conduit or raceway as the supply conductors. This conductor is insulated
from the metallic raceway and all ground points throughout its length. It origi-
nates at an isolated ground-type receptacle or equipment input terminal block
and terminates at the point where neutral and ground are bonded at the power
source. See NFPA 70-1993, Section 250-74, Exception #4 and Section 250-75,
Exception.7
isolation
Separation of one section of a system from undesired influences of
other sections.
ITI curve
A set of curves published by the Information Technology Industry
Council (ITI) representing the withstand capabilities of computers connected to
120-V power systems in terms of the magnitude and duration of the voltage dis-
turbance.10 The ITI curve replaces the curves originally developed by the ITI’s
predecessor organization, the Computer Business Equipment Manufacturers
Association (CBEMA).9 See CBEMA curve.
linear load
An electrical load device that, in steady-state operation, presents
an essentially constant load impedance to the power source throughout the
cycle of applied voltage.
long-duration variation
A variation of the rms value of the voltage from nom-
inal voltage for a time greater than 1 min. Usually further described using a
modifier indicating the magnitude of a voltage variation (e.g., undervoltage,
overvoltage, or voltage interruption).
Terms and Definitions
35
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

low-side surges
A term coined by distribution transformer designers to
describe the current surge that appears to be injected into the transformer sec-
ondary terminals during a lightning strike to grounded conductors in the vicin-
ity.
momentary
When used to quantify the duration of a short-duration variation
as a modifier, refers to a time range at the power frequency from 30 cycles to 3 s.
noise
Unwanted electrical signals that produce undesirable effects in the cir-
cuits of the control systems in which they occur.8 (For this document, “control sys-
tems” is intended to include sensitive electronic equipment in total or in part.)
nominal voltage (Vn)
A nominal value assigned to a circuit or system for the
purpose of conveniently designating its voltage class (as 208/120, 480/277,
600).6
nonlinear load
Electrical load that draws current discontinuously or whose
impedance varies throughout the cycle of the input ac voltage waveform.
normal mode voltage
A voltage that appears between or among active circuit
conductors.
notch
A switching (or other) disturbance of the normal power voltage wave-
form, lasting less than a half-cycle, which is initially of opposite polarity than
the waveform and is thus subtracted from the normal waveform in terms of the
peak value of the disturbance voltage. This includes complete loss of voltage for
up to a half-cycle.
oscillatory transient
A sudden, nonpower frequency change in the steady-
state condition of voltage or current that includes both positive- or negative-
polarity value.
overvoltage
When used to describe a specific type of long-duration variation,
refers to a voltage having a value of at least 10 percent above the nominal volt-
age for a period of time greater than 1 min.
passive filter
A combination of inductors, capacitors, and resistors designed
to eliminate one or more harmonics. The most common variety is simply an
inductor in series with a shunt capacitor, which short-circuits the major dis-
torting harmonic component from the system.
phase shift
The displacement in time of one voltage waveform relative to
other voltage waveform(s).
power factor, displacement
The power factor of the fundamental frequency
components of the voltage and current waveforms.
power factor (true)
The ratio of active power (watts) to apparent power
(voltamperes).
Plt
The long-term flicker severity level as defined by IEC 61000-4-15, based
on an observation period of 2 h.
36
Chapter Two
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Pst
The short-term flicker severity level as defined by IEC 61000-4-15, based
on an observation period of 10 min. A Pst value greater than 1.0 corresponds to
the level of irritability for 50 percent of the persons subjected to the measured
flicker.
pulse
An abrupt variation of short duration of a physical quantity followed by
a rapid return to the initial value.
pulse-width modulation (PWM)
A common technique used in inverters to cre-
ate an ac waveform by controlling the electronic switch to produce varying-
width pulses. Minimizes power frequency harmonic distortion in some
applications, but care must be taken to properly filter out the switching fre-
quencies, which are commonly 3 to 6 kHz.
reclosing
The common utility practice used on overhead lines of closing the
breaker within a short time after clearing a fault, taking advantage of the fact
that most faults are transient, or temporary.
recovery time
The time interval needed for the output voltage or current to
return to a value within the regulation specification after a step load or line
change.8 Also may indicate the time interval required to bring a system back to
its operating condition after an interruption or dropout.
recovery voltage
The voltage that occurs across the terminals of a pole of a
circuit-interrupting device upon interruption of the current.8
rectifier
A power electronic device for converting alternating current to direct
current.
resonance
A condition in which the natural frequencies of the inductances
and capacitances in the power system are excited and sustained by disturbing
phenomena. This can result in excessive voltages and currents. Waveform dis-
tortion, whether harmonic or nonharmonic, is probably the most frequent exci-
tation source. Also, various short-circuit and open-circuit faults can result in
resonant conditions.
safety ground
See equipment grounding conductor.
sag
A decrease to between 0.1 and 0.9 pu in rms voltage or current at the
power frequency for durations of 0.5 cycle to 1 min.
shield
As normally applied to instrumentation cables, refers to a conductive
sheath (usually metallic) applied, over the insulation of a conductor or conduc-
tors, for the purpose of providing means to reduce coupling between the con-
ductors so shielded and other conductors that may be susceptible to, or which
may be generating, unwanted electrostatic or electromagnetic fields (noise).
shielding
Shielding is the use of a conducting and/or ferromagnetic barrier
between a potentially disturbing noise source and sensitive circuitry. Shields
are used to protect cables (data and power) and electronic circuits. They may
Terms and Definitions
37
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

be in the form of metal barriers, enclosures, or wrappings around source cir-
cuits and receiving circuits.
shielding (of utility lines)
The construction of a grounded conductor or tower
over the lines to intercept lightning strokes in an attempt to keep the lightning
currents out of the power system.
short-duration variation
A variation of the rms value of the voltage from nom-
inal voltage for a time greater than one-half cycle of the power frequency but
less than or equal to 1 min. Usually further described using a modifier indi-
cating the magnitude of a voltage variation (e.g., sag, swell, or interruption)
and possibly a modifier indicating the duration of the variation (e.g., instanta-
neous, momentary, or temporary).
signal reference grid (or plane)
A system of conductive paths among inter-
connected equipment, which reduces noise-induced voltages to levels that min-
imize improper operation. Common configurations include grids and planes.
sustained
When used to quantify the duration of a voltage interruption,
refers to the time frame associated with a long-duration variation (i.e., greater
than 1 min).
swell
A temporary increase in the rms value of the voltage of more than 10
percent of the nominal voltage, at the power frequency, for durations from 0.5
cycle to 1 min.
sympathetic tripping
When a circuit breaker on an unfaulted feeder section
trips unnecessarily due to backfeed into a fault elsewhere. Most commonly
occurs when sensitive ground fault relaying is employed.
synchronous closing
Generally used in reference to closing all three poles of
a capacitor switch in synchronism with the power system to minimize tran-
sients.
temporary
When used to quantify the duration of a short-duration variation
as a modifier, refers to a time range from 3 s to 1 min.
total demand distortion (TDD)
The ratio of the root mean square of the har-
monic current to the rms value of the rated or maximum demand fundamental
current, expressed as a percent.
total disturbance level
The level of a given electromagnetic disturbance caused
by the superposition of the emission of all pieces of equipment in a given system.2
total harmonic distortion (THD)
The ratio of the root mean square of the har-
monic content to the rms value of the fundamental quantity, expressed as a per-
cent of the fundamental.8
transient
Pertaining to or designating a phenomenon or a quantity that
varies between two consecutive steady states during a time interval that is
short compared to the time scale of interest. A transient can be a unidirectional
impulse of either polarity or a damped oscillatory wave with the first peak
occurring in either polarity.2
38
Chapter Two
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

triplen harmonics
A term frequently used to refer to the odd multiples of the
third harmonic, which deserve special attention because of their natural ten-
dency to be zero sequence.
undervoltage
When used to describe a specific type of long-duration varia-
tion, refers to a measured voltage having a value at least 10 percent below the
nominal voltage for a period of time greater than 1 min. In other contexts, such
as distributed generation protection, the time frame of interest would be mea-
sured in cycles or seconds.
voltage change
A variation of the root mean square or peak value of a voltage
between two consecutive levels sustained for definite but unspecified durations.6
voltage dip
See sag.
voltage distortion
Distortion of the ac line voltage. See distortion.
voltage fluctuation
A series of voltage changes or a cyclical variation of the
voltage envelope.6
voltage imbalance (unbalance)
A condition in which the three-phase volt-
ages differ in amplitude or are displaced from their normal 120 degree phase
relationship or both. Frequently expressed as the ratio of the negative-
sequence or zero-sequence voltage to the positive-sequence voltage, in percent.
voltage interruption
Disappearance of the supply voltage on one or more
phases. Usually qualified by an additional term indicating the duration of the
interruption (e.g., momentary, temporary, or sustained).
voltage regulation
The degree of control or stability of the rms voltage at the
load. Often specified in relation to other parameters, such as input-voltage
changes, load changes, or temperature changes.
voltage magnification
The magnification of capacitor switching oscillatory
transient voltage on the primary side by capacitors on the secondary side of a
transformer.
waveform distortion
A steady-state deviation from an ideal sine wave of
power frequency principally characterized by the spectral content of the
deviation.
2.11
Ambiguous Terms
Much of the history of the power quality movement has been marked by
a fair amount of hype as a number of equipment vendors have jockeyed
for position in the marketplace. This book attempts to apply a strong
engineering interpretation of all areas of power quality and remove the
hype and mystery. Marketers have created many colorful phrases to
entice potential customers to buy. Unfortunately, many of these terms
are ambiguous and cannot be used for technical definitions.
Terms and Definitions
39
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The following words are commonly used but have a variety of mean-
ings or no meaning at all. For example, what is a “power surge”? This
term has probably been used at some time to describe each of the dis-
turbance phenomena described in this book. Is there really a surge in
the power? Or is it only the voltage? Power is related to the product of
voltage and current. Normally, voltage is the quantity causing the
observed disturbance and the resulting power will not necessarily be
directly proportional to the voltage. The solution will generally be to
correct or limit the voltage as opposed to doing something to address
the power. Therefore, the following terms are meaningless in terms of
describing an event and determining a solution.
Blackout
Glitch
Blink
Outage
Brownout
Interruption
Bump
Power surge
Clean ground
Raw power
Clean power
Spike
Dirty ground
Surge
Dirty power
Wink
The unqualified use of these words for describing power quality phe-
nomena is discouraged. Try to use the standard terms where possible,
or qualify nonstandard terms with appropriate explanation.
2.12
CBEMA and ITI Curves
One of the most frequently employed displays of data to represent the
power quality is the so-called CBEMA curve. A portion of the curve
adapted from IEEE Standard 4469 that we typically use in our analy-
sis of power quality monitoring results is shown in Fig. 2.15. This curve
was originally developed by CBEMA to describe the tolerance of main-
frame computer equipment to the magnitude and duration of voltage
variations on the power system. While many modern computers have
greater tolerance than this, the curve has become a standard design
target for sensitive equipment to be applied on the power system and a
common format for reporting power quality variation data.
The axes represent magnitude and duration of the event. Points
below the envelope are presumed to cause the load to drop out due to
lack of energy. Points above the envelope are presumed to cause other
malfunctions such as insulation failure, overvoltage trip, and overexci-
tation. The upper curve is actually defined down to 0.001 cycle where
it has a value of about 375 percent voltage. We typically employ the
curve only from 0.1 cycle and higher due to limitations in power qual-
40
Chapter Two
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ity monitoring instruments and differences in opinion over defining the
magnitude values in the subcycle time frame.
The CBEMA organization has been replaced by ITI,10 and a modified
curve has been developed that specifically applies to common 120-V com-
puter equipment (see Fig. 2.16). The concept is similar to the CBEMA
curve. Although developed for 120-V computer equipment, the curve has
been applied to general power quality evaluation like its predecessor curve.
Both curves are used as a reference in this book to define the with-
stand capability of various loads and devices for protection from power
quality variations. For display of large quantities of power quality mon-
itoring data, we frequently add a third axis to the plot to denote the
number of events within a certain predefined cell of magnitude and
duration. If restricted to just the two-dimensional views shown in Fig.
2.16, the plot tends to turn into a solid mass of points over time, which
is not useful.
2.13
References
1. TC77WG6 
(Secretary) 
110-R5, 
Draft 
Classification 
of 
Electromagnetic
Environments, January 1991.
2. IEEE Standard 1159-1995, Recommended Practice on Monitoring Electric Power.
3. IEC 50 (161), International Electrotechnical Vocabulary, chap. 161: “Electromagnetic
Compatibility,” 1989.
4. UIE-DWG-3-92-G, Guide to Quality of Electrical Supply for Industrial
Installations—Part 1: General Introduction to Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC),
Terms and Definitions
41
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
87%
106%
Percent
Computer Voltage
Tolerance Envelope
Time in Cycles (60 Hz)
Voltage
Figure 2.15
A portion of the CBEMA curve commonly used as a design target for equip-
ment and a format for reporting power quality variation data.
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Types of Disturbances and Relevant Standards. Advance UIE Edition. “Disturbances”
Working Group GT 2.
5. UIE-DWG-2-92-D, UIE Guide to Measurements of Voltage Dips and Short
Interruptions Occurring in Industrial Installations.
6. IEC 61000-2-1(1990-05), “Description of the Environment—Electromagnetic
Environment for Low Frequency Conducted Disturbances and Signaling in Public
Power 
Supply 
Systems,” 
Electromagnetic 
Compatibility 
(EMC)—Part 
2,
Environment, Section 1, 1990.
7. ANSI/NFPA 70-1993, National Electrical Code.
8. IEEE Standard 100-1992, IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and Electronic
Terms.
9. IEEE Standard 446-1987, IEEE Recommended Practice for Emergency and Standby
Power Systems for Industrial and Commercial Applications (IEEE Orange Book).
10. Information Technology Industry Council (ITI), 1250 Eye Street NW, Suite 200,
Washington, D.C. (http://www.itic.org).
11. IEC 61000-4-30 77A/356/CDV, Power Quality Measurement Methods, 2001.
12. IEC 61000-4-15, Flicker Meter—Functional and Design Specifications, 1997.
42
Chapter Two
Figure 2.16
ITI curve for susceptibility of 120-V computer equipment.
0.001c
0.01c
0.1c
0.5c 1c
10c
100c
1000c
1s
1ms
3ms
20ms
0.5s
10s Steady
State
Duration of Disturbance in Cycles (c) and Seconds (s)
Applicable to 120, 120/208, and
120/240 Nominal Voltages
Voltage Tolerance
Envelope
0
40
70
80
90
100
110
120
140
200
300
400
500
Terms and Definitions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

43
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Voltage sags and interruptions are related power quality problems.
Both are usually the result of faults in the power system and switching
actions to isolate the faulted sections. They are characterized by rms
voltage variations outside the normal operating range of voltages.
A voltage sag is a short-duration (typically 0.5 to 30 cycles) reduction
in rms voltage caused by faults on the power system and the starting
of large loads, such as motors. Momentary interruptions (typically no
more than 2 to 5 s) cause a complete loss of voltage and are a common
result of the actions taken by utilities to clear transient faults on their
systems. Sustained interruptions of longer than 1 min are generally
due to permanent faults.
Utilities have been faced with rising numbers of complaints about
the quality of power due to sags and interruptions. There are a number
of reasons for this, with the most important being that customers in all
sectors (residential, commercial, and industrial) have more sensitive
loads. The influx of digital computers and other types of electronic con-
trols is at the heart of the problem. Computer controls tend to lose their
memory, and the processes that are being controlled also tend to be
more complex and, therefore, take much more time to restart.
Industries are relying more on automated equipment to achieve maxi-
mum productivity to remain competitive. Thus, an interruption has
considerable economic impact.1,3
3.1
Sources of Sags and Interruptions
Voltage sags and interruptions are generally caused by faults (short
circuits) on the utility system.4 Consider a customer that is supplied
from the feeder supplied by circuit breaker 1 on the diagram shown in
Chapter3
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Fig. 3.1. If there is a fault on the same feeder, the customer will expe-
rience a voltage sag during the fault followed by an interruption when
the breaker opens to clear the fault. If the fault is temporary in nature,
a reclosing operation on the breaker should be successful and the inter-
ruption will only be temporary. It will usually require about 5 or 6
cycles for the breaker to operate, during which time a voltage sag
occurs. The breaker will remain open for typically a minimum of 12
cycles up to 5 s depending on utility reclosing practices. Sensitive
equipment will almost surely trip during this interruption.
A much more common event would be a fault on one of the other feed-
ers from the substation, i.e., a fault on a parallel feeder, or a fault some-
where on the transmission system (see the fault locations shown in Fig.
3.1). In either of these cases, the customer will experience a voltage sag
during the period that the fault is actually on the system. As soon as
breakers open to clear the fault, normal voltage will be restored at the
customer.
Note that to clear the fault shown on the transmission system, both
breakers A and B must operate. Transmission breakers will typically
clear a fault in 5 or 6 cycles. In this case there are two lines supplying
the distribution substation and only one has a fault. Therefore, cus-
tomers supplied from the substation should expect to see only a sag and
not an interruption. The distribution fault on feeder 4 may be cleared
either by the lateral fuse or the breaker, depending on the utility’s fuse-
saving practice.
Any of these fault locations can cause equipment to misoperate in
customer facilities. The relative importance of faults on the transmis-
44
Chapter Three
115 kV
13.8 kV
SLG Fault
TRANSMISSION
DISTRIBUTION
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
D
E
F
SLG Fault
Figure 3.1
Fault locations on the utility power system.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

sion system and the distribution system will depend on the specific
characteristics of the systems (underground versus overhead distribu-
tion, lightning flash densities, overhead exposure, etc.) and the sensi-
tivity of the equipment to voltage sags. Figure 3.2 shows an example of
the breakdown of the events that caused equipment misoperation for
one industrial customer. Note that faults on the customer feeder only
accounted for 23 percent of the events that resulted in equipment
misoperation. This illustrates the importance of understanding the
voltage sag performance of the system and the equipment sensitivity to
these events.
Figures 3.3 and 3.4 show an interesting utility fault event recorded
for an Electric Power Research Institute research project 4,11 by 8010
PQNode* instruments at two locations in the power system. The top
chart in each of the figures is the rms voltage variation with time, and
the bottom chart is the first 175 ms of the actual waveform. Figure 3.3
shows the characteristic measured at a customer location on an
unfaulted part of the feeder. Figure 3.4 shows the momentary inter-
ruption (actually two separate interruptions) observed downline from
the fault. The interrupting device in this case was a line recloser that
was able to interrupt the fault very quickly in about 2.5 cycles. This
device can have a variety of settings. In this case, it was set for two fast
operations and two delayed operations. Figure 3.3 shows only the brief
sag to 65 percent voltage for the first fast operation. There was an iden-
tical sag for the second operation. While this is very brief sag that is vir-
tually unnoticeable by observing lighting blinks, many industrial
processes would have shut down.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
45
Faults on Own
Circuit
23%
Faults on Parallel
Circuits
46%
Faults on
Transmission
System
31%
Figure 3.2
Example of fault locations that caused misoperation of sensi-
tive production equipment at an industrial facility (the example system
had multiple overhead distribution feeders and an extensive overhead
transmission system supplying the substation).
*PQNode is a registered trademark of Dranetz-BMI, Edison, N.J.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Figure 3.4 clearly shows the voltage sag prior to fault clearing and
the subsequent two fast recloser operations. The reclose time (the time
the recloser was open) was a little more than 2 s, a very common time
for a utility line recloser. Apparently, the fault—perhaps, a tree
branch—was not cleared completely by the first operation, forcing a
second. The system was restored after the second operation.
There are a few things to note about this typical event that will tie in
with other material in this book:
1. The voltage did not go to zero during the fault as is often assumed in text-
book examples. There are few examples of the textbook case in real life.
2. The line recloser detected the fault and operated very quickly. There
is a common misconception that fault interruption is slower on the
distribution system than on the transmission system. While it can
be slower, it can also be faster.
3. Since the voltage did not collapse to zero during the fault, induction
machines will continue to have excitation and continue to feed the
46
Chapter Three
Phase B Voltage
RMS Variation
PQNode Local
Trigger
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
Voltage (%)
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
Voltage (%)
Time (s)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Time (ms)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Duration
0.050 s
Min
65.80
Ave
90.10
Max
100.5
Figure 3.3
Voltage sag due to a short-circuit fault on a parallel utility feeder.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

fault. This can be an especially important consideration for distrib-
uted generation (Chap. 9).
3.2
Estimating Voltage Sag Performance
It is important to understand the expected voltage sag performance of
the supply system so that facilities can be designed and equipment
specifications developed to assure the optimum operation of production
facilities. The following is a general procedure for working with indus-
trial customers to assure compatibility between the supply system
characteristics and the facility operation:
1. Determine the number and characteristics of voltage sags that
result from transmission system faults.
2. Determine the number and characteristics of voltage sags that
result from distribution system faults (for facilities that are supplied
from distribution systems).
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
47
Phase B Voltage
RMS Variation
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
–100
–75
–50
–25
0
25
50
75
100
20
40
60
80
100
120
Voltage (%)
Voltage (%)
Time (s)
Time (ms)
PQNode Local
Trigger
Duration
4.983 s
Min
2.257
Ave
8.712
Max
100.2
Figure 3.4
Utility short-circuit fault event with two fast trip operations of utility 
line recloser.11
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

3. Determine the equipment sensitivity to voltage sags. This will
determine the actual performance of the production process based
on voltage sag performance calculated in steps 1 and 2.
4. Evaluate the economics of different solutions that could improve the
performance, either on the supply system (fewer voltage sags) or
within the customer facility (better immunity).
The steps in this procedure are discussed in more detail throughout
this chapter.
3.2.1
Area of vulnerability
The concept of an area of vulnerability has been developed to help eval-
uate the likelihood of sensitive equipment being subjected to voltage
lower than its minimum voltage sag ride-through capability.5 The latter
term is defined as the minimum voltage magnitude a piece of equipment
can withstand or tolerate without misoperation or failure. This is also
known as the equipment voltage sag immunity or susceptibility limit.
An area of vulnerability is determined by the total circuit miles of expo-
sure to faults that can cause voltage magnitudes at an end-user facility
to drop below the equipment minimum voltage sag ride-through capa-
bility. Figure 3.5 shows an example of an area of vulnerability diagram
for motor contactor and adjustable-speed-drive loads at an end-user
facility served from the distribution system. The loads will be subject to
faults on both the transmission system and the distribution system. The
actual number of voltage sags that a facility can expect is determined by
48
Chapter Three
115 kV
13.8 kV
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
D
E
F
AREA OF VULNERABILITY
FOR MOTOR CONTACTORS
AREA OF VULNERABILITY
FOR ASDs
LOAD
Figure 3.5
Illustration of an area of vulnerability.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

combining the area of vulnerability with the expected fault performance
for this portion of the power system. The expected fault performance is
usually determined from historical data.
3.2.2
Equipment sensitivity to voltage sags
Equipment within an end-user facility may have different sensitivity to
voltage sags.8 Equipment sensitivity to voltage sags is very dependent
on the specific load type, control settings, and applications.
Consequently, it is often difficult to identify which characteristics of a
given voltage sag are most likely to cause equipment to misoperate.
The most commonly used characteristics are the duration and magni-
tude of the sag. Other less commonly used characteristics include
phase shift and unbalance, missing voltage, three-phase voltage unbal-
ance during the sag event, and the point-in-the-wave at which the sag
initiates and terminates. Generally, equipment sensitivity to voltage
sags can be divided into three categories:
■Equipment sensitive to only the magnitude of a voltage sag.
This
group includes devices such as undervoltage relays, process controls,
motor drive controls,6 and many types of automated machines (e.g.,
semiconductor manufacturing equipment). Devices in this group are
sensitive to the minimum (or maximum) voltage magnitude experi-
enced during a sag (or swell). The duration of the disturbance is usu-
ally of secondary importance for these devices.
■Equipment sensitive to both the magnitude and duration of a voltage
sag.
This group includes virtually all equipment that uses elec-
tronic power supplies. Such equipment misoperates or fails when the
power supply output voltage drops below specified values. Thus, the
important characteristic for this type of equipment is the duration
that the rms voltage is below a specified threshold at which the
equipment trips.
■Equipment sensitive to characteristics other than magnitude and
duration.
Some devices are affected by other sag characteristics
such as the phase unbalance during the sag event, the point-in-the-
wave at which the sag is initiated, or any transient oscillations occur-
ring during the disturbance. These characteristics are more subtle
than magnitude and duration, and their impacts are much more dif-
ficult to generalize. As a result, the rms variation performance
indices defined here are focused on the more common magnitude and
duration characteristics.
For end users with sensitive processes, the voltage sag ride-through
capability is usually the most important characteristic to consider.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
49
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

These loads can generally be impacted by very short duration events,
and virtually all voltage sag conditions last at least 4 or 5 cycles (unless
the fault is cleared by a current-limiting fuse). Thus, one of the most
common methods to quantify equipment susceptibility to voltage sags
is using a magnitude-duration plot as shown in Fig. 3.6. It shows the
voltage sag magnitude that will cause equipment to misoperate as a
function of the sag duration.
The curve labeled CBEMArepresents typical equipment sensitivity char-
acteristics. The curve was developed by the CBEMA and was adopted in
IEEE 446 (Orange Book). Since the association reorganized in 1994 and was
subsequently renamed the Information Technology Industry Council (ITI),
the CBEMA curve was also updated and renamed the ITI curve. Typical
loads will likely trip off when the voltage is below the CBEMA, or ITI, curve.
The curve labeled ASD represents an example ASD voltage sag ride-
through capability for a device that is very sensitive to voltage sags. It
trips for sags below 0.9 pu that last for only 4 cycles. The contactor
curve represents typical contactor sag ride-through characteristics. It
trips for voltage sags below 0.5 pu that last for more than 1 cycle.
The area of vulnerability for motor contactors shown in Fig. 3.5 indi-
cates that faults within this area will cause the end-user voltage to
drop below 0.5 pu. Motor contactors having a minimum voltage sag
ride-through capability of 0.5 pu would have tripped out when a fault
50
Chapter Three
10–1
100
101
102
103
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Duration (cycles)
ITIC
CBEMA
ASDs
Motor
contactors
Running
Stopped
Running
Stopped
ITI
CBEMA
ASDs
Motor
contactors
Running
Stopped
Running
Stopped
Percent of nominal voltage (rms or peak equivalent)
Figure 3.6
Typical equipment voltage sag ride-through capability curves.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

causing a voltage sag with duration of more than 1 cycle occurs within
the area of vulnerability. However, faults outside this area will not
cause the voltage to drop below 0.5 pu. The same discussion applies to
the area of vulnerability for ASD loads. The less sensitive the equip-
ment, the smaller the area of vulnerability will be (and the fewer times
sags will cause the equipment to misoperate).
3.2.3
Transmission system sag
performance evaluation
The voltage sag performance for a given customer facility will depend on
whether the customer is supplied from the transmission system or from
the distribution system. For a customer supplied from the transmission
system, the voltage sag performance will depend on only the transmission
system fault performance. On the other hand, for a customer supplied
from the distribution system, the voltage sag performance will depend on
the fault performance on both the transmission and distribution systems.
This section discusses procedures to estimate the transmission sys-
tem contribution to the overall voltage sag performance at a facility.
Section 3.2.4 focuses on the distribution system contribution to the
overall voltage sag performance.
Transmission line faults and the subsequent opening of the protec-
tive devices rarely cause an interruption for any customer because of
the interconnected nature of most modern-day transmission networks.
These faults do, however, cause voltage sags. Depending on the equip-
ment sensitivity, the unit may trip off, resulting in substantial mone-
tary losses. The ability to estimate the expected voltage sags at an
end-user location is therefore very important.
Most utilities have detailed short-circuit models of the intercon-
nected transmission system available for programs such as ASPEN*
One Liner (Fig. 3.7). These programs can calculate the voltage through-
out the system resulting from faults around the system. Many of them
can also apply faults at locations along the transmission lines to help
calculate the area of vulnerability at a specific location.
The area of vulnerability describes all the fault locations that can
cause equipment to misoperate. The type of fault must also be consid-
ered in this analysis. Single-line-to-ground faults will not result in the
same voltage sag at the customer equipment as a three-phase fault.
The characteristics at the end-use equipment also depend on how the
voltages are changed by transformer connections and how the equip-
ment is connected, i.e., phase-to-ground or phase-to-phase. Table 3.1
summarizes voltages at the customer transformer secondary for a sin-
gle-line-to-ground fault at the primary.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
51
*Advanced Systems for Power Engineering, Inc.; www.aspeninc.com.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The relationships in Table 3.1 illustrate the fact that a single-line-
to-ground fault on the primary of a delta-wye grounded transformer
does not result in zero voltage on any of the phase-to-ground or
phase-to-phase voltages on the secondary of the transformer. The
magnitude of the lowest secondary voltage depends on how the
equipment is connected:
■Equipment connected line-to-line would experience a minimum volt-
age of 33 percent.
■Equipment connected line-to-neutral would experience a minimum
voltage of 58 percent.
This illustrates the importance of both transformer connections and
the equipment connections in determining the actual voltage that
equipment will experience during a fault on the supply system.
Math Bollen16 developed the concept of voltage sag “types” to describe
the different voltage sag characteristics that can be experienced at the
end-user level for different fault conditions and system configurations.
The five types that can commonly be experienced are illustrated in Fig.
3.8. These fault types can be used to conveniently summarize the
52
Chapter Three
Figure 3.7
Example of modeling the transmission system in a short-circuit program for
calculation of the area of vulnerability.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Voltage Sags and Interruptions
53
0.58
1.00 0.58
0.00 1.00
1.00
0.58
1.00 0.58
0.33 0.88
0.88
0.33
0.88 0.88
—
—
—
0.88
0.88 0.33
0.58 1.00
0.58
TABLE 3.1
Transformer Secondary Voltages with a Single-Line-to-Ground
Fault on the Primary
Transformer 
connection 
Phase-to-phase
Phase-to-neutral 
Phasor 
(primary/secondary)
Vab
Vbc
Vca
Van
Vbn
Vcn
diagram
Sag Type D
One-phase
sag, phase
shift
Sag Type B
One-phase
sag, no phase
shift
Phase
Shift
Angle
None
Sag Type C
Two-phase
sag, phase
shift
Sag Type E
Two-phase
sag, no phase
shift
Sag Type A
Three-phase
sag
Note: Three-phase sags
should lead to relatively
balanced conditions;
therefore, sag type A is a
sufficient characterization
for all three-phase sags.
Number of Phases
1
2
3
Figure 3.8
Voltage sag types at end-use equipment that result from different types of
faults and transformer connections.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

expected performance at a customer location for different types of
faults on the supply system.
Table 3.2 is an example of an area of vulnerability listing giving all the
fault locations that can result in voltage sags below 80 percent at the cus-
tomer equipment (in this case a customer with equipment connected
line-to-line and supplied through one delta-wye transformer from the
transmission system Tennessee 132-kV bus). The actual expected per-
formance is then determined by combining the area of vulnerability with
the expected number of faults within this area of vulnerability.
The fault performance is usually described in terms of faults per 100
miles/year (mi/yr). Most utilities maintain statistics of fault perfor-
mance at all the different transmission voltages. These systemwide
statistics can be used along with the area of vulnerability to estimate
the actual expected voltage sag performance. Figure 3.9 gives an exam-
ple of this type of analysis. The figure shows the expected number of
voltage sags per year at the customer equipment due to transmission
system faults. The performance is broken down into the different sag
types because the equipment sensitivity may be different for sags that
affect all three phases versus sags that only affect one or two phases.
3.2.4
Utility distribution system sag
performance evaluation
Customers that are supplied at distribution voltage levels are impacted
by faults on both the transmission system and the distribution system.
The analysis at the distribution level must also include momentary
interruptions caused by the operation of protective devices to clear the
faults.7 These interruptions will most likely trip out sensitive equip-
ment. The example presented in this section illustrates data require-
ments and computation procedures for evaluating the expected voltage
sag and momentary interruption performance. The overall voltage sag
performance at an end-user facility is the total of the expected voltage
sag performance from the transmission and distribution systems.
Figure 3.10 shows a typical distribution system with multiple feed-
ers and fused branches, and protective devices. The utility protection
scheme plays an important role in the voltage sag and momentary
interruption performance. The critical information needed to compute
voltage sag performance can be summarized as follows:
■Number of feeders supplied from the substation.
■Average feeder length.
■Average feeder reactance.
■Short-circuit equivalent reactance at the substation.
54
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Voltage Sags and Interruptions
55
TABLE 3.2
Calculating Expected Sag Performance at a Specific
Customer Site for a Given Voltage Level
Voltage at 
Bus 
monitored 
Fault type
Faulted bus
voltage
bus (pu) 
Sag type
3LG
Tennessee
132
0
A
3LG
Nevada
132
0.23
A
3LG
Texas
132
0.33
A
2LG
Tennessee
132
0.38
C
2LG
Nevada
132
0.41
C
3LG
Claytor
132
0.42
A
1LG
Tennessee
132
0.45
D
2LG
Texas
132
0.48
C
3LG
Glen Lyn
132
0.48
A
3LG
Reusens
132
0.5
A
1LG
Nevada
132
0.5
D
L-L
Tennessee
132
0.5
C
2LG
Claytor
132
0.52
C
L-L
Nevada
132
0.52
C
L-L
Texas
132
0.55
C
2LG
Glen Lyn
132
0.57
C
L-L
Claytor
132
0.59
C
3LG
Arizona
132
0.59
A
2LG
Reusens
132
0.59
C
1LG
Texas
132
0.6
D
L-L
Glen Lyn
132
0.63
C
1LG
Claytor
132
0.63
D
L-L
Reusens
132
0.65
C
3LG
Ohio
132
0.65
A
1LG
Glen Lyn
132
0.67
D
1LG
Reusens
132
0.67
D
2LG
Arizona
132
0.67
C
2LG
Ohio
132
0.7
C
L-L
Arizona
132
0.7
C
3LG
Fieldale
132
0.72
A
L-L
Ohio
132
0.73
C
2LG
Fieldale
132
0.76
C
3LG
New Hampshire
33
0.76
A
1LG
Ohio
132
0.77
D
3LG
Vermont
33
0.77
A
L-L
Fieldale
132
0.78
C
1LG
Arizona
132
0.78
D
2LG
Vermont
33
0.79
C
L-L
Vermont
33
0.79
C
3LG
Minnesota
33
0.8
A
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

56
Chapter Three
FEEDERS
1
2
3
4
SYSTEM
SOURCE
SUBSTATION
FUSED
LATERAL
BRANCH
LINE
RECLOSER
RECLOSING
BREAKERS
Figure 3.9
Estimated voltage sag performance at customer equipment due to transmis-
sion system faults.
Figure 3.10
Typical distribution system illustrating protection devices.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Feeder reactors, if any.
■Average feeder fault performance which includes three-phase-line-
to-ground (3LG) faults and single-line-to-ground (SLG) faults in
faults per mile per month. The feeder performance data may be avail-
able from protection logs. However, data for faults that are cleared by
downline fuses or downline protective devices may be difficult to
obtain and this information may have to be estimated.
There are two possible locations for faults on the distribution systems,
i.e., on the same feeder and on parallel feeders. An area of vulnerabil-
ity defining the total circuit miles of fault exposures that can cause
voltage sags below equipment sag ride-through capability at a specific
customer needs to be defined. The computation of the expected voltage
sag performance can be performed as follows:
Faults on parallel feeders.
Voltage experienced at the end-user facility
following a fault on parallel feeders can be estimated by calculating the
expected voltage magnitude at the substation. The voltage magnitude
at the substation is impacted by the fault impedance and location, the
configuration of the power system, and the system protection scheme.
Figure 3.11 illustrates the effect of the distance between the substation
and the fault locations for 3LG and SLG faults on a radial distribution
system. The SLG fault curve shows the A-B phase bus voltage on the
secondary of a delta-wye–grounded step-down transformer, with an A
phase-to-ground fault on the primary. The actual voltage at the end-
user location can be computed by converting the substation voltage
using Table 3.1. The voltage sag performance for a specific sensitive
equipment having the minimum ride-through voltage of vs can be com-
puted as follows:
Eparallel (vs)  N1  Ep1  N3  Ep3
where N1 and N3 are the fault performance data for SLG and 3LG
faults in faults per miles per month, and Ep1 and Ep3 are the total cir-
cuit miles of exposure to SLG and 3LG faults on parallel feeders that
result in voltage sags below the minimum ride-through voltage vs at the
end-user location.
Faults on the same feeder.
In this step the expected voltage sag magni-
tude at the end-user location is computed as a function of fault location
on the same feeder. Note that, however, the computation is performed
only for fault locations that will result in a sag but will not result in a
momentary interruption, which will be computed separately. Examples
of such fault locations include faults beyond a downline recloser or a
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
57
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

branched fuse that is coordinated to clear before the substation
recloser. The voltage sag performance for specific sensitive equipment
with ride-through voltage vs is computed as follows:
Esame (vs)  N1  Es1  N3  Es3
where Es1and Es3 are the total circuit miles of exposure to SLG and 3LG
on the same feeders that result in voltage sags below vs at the end-user
location.
The total expected voltage sag performance for the minimum ride-
through voltage vs would be the sum of expected voltage sag perfor-
mance on the parallel and the same feeders, i.e., Eparallel(vs)  Esame(vs).
The total expected sag performance can be computed for other voltage
thresholds, which then can be plotted to produce a plot similar to ones
in Fig. 3.9.
The expected interruption performance at the specified location can
be determined by the length of exposure that will cause a breaker or
other protective device in series with the customer facility to operate.
For example, if the protection is designed to operate the substation
breaker for any fault on the feeder, then this length is the total expo-
sure length. The expected number of interruptions can be computed as
follows:
Eint  Lint  (N1  N3)
where Lint is the total circuit miles of exposure to SLG and 3LG that
results in interruptions at an end-user facility.
58
Chapter Three
40
30
20
10
0
50
60
70
80
90
Single-Line-to-Ground Fault
3-Phase Fault
% Bus Voltage
Phase A-B
Distance from Substation to Fault (ft)
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
Figure 3.11
Example of voltage sag magnitude at an end-user location as a function of
the fault location along a parallel feeder circuit.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

3.3
Fundamental Principles of Protection
Several things can be done by the utility, end user, and equipment man-
ufacturer to reduce the number and severity of voltage sags and to
reduce the sensitivity of equipment to voltage sags. Figure 3.12 illus-
trates voltage sag solution alternatives and their relative costs. As this
chart indicates, it is generally less costly to tackle the problem at its
lowest level, close to the load. The best answer is to incorporate ride-
through capability into the equipment specifications themselves. This
essentially means keeping problem equipment out of the plant, or at
least identifying ahead of time power conditioning requirements.
Several ideas, outlined here, could easily be incorporated into any com-
pany’s equipment procurement specifications to help alleviate prob-
lems associated with voltage sags:
1. Equipment manufacturers should have voltage sag ride-through capa-
bility curves (similar to the ones shown previously) available to their
customers so that an initial evaluation of the equipment can be per-
formed. Customers should begin to demand that these types of curves
be made available so that they can properly evaluate equipment.
2. The company procuring new equipment should establish a proce-
dure that rates the importance of the equipment. If the equipment
is critical in nature, the company must make sure that adequate
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
59
3 - Overall
Protection
Inside Plant
CONTROLS
MOTORS
OTHER LOADS
Sensitive Process Machine
3
2
1
2 - Controls
Protection
1 - Equipment
Specifications
Utility
Source
4
4 - Utility Solutions
Feeder or
Group of
Machines
INCREASING COST
Customer Solutions
Figure 3.12
Approaches for voltage sag ride-through.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ride-through capability is included when the equipment is pur-
chased. If the equipment is not important or does not cause major
disruptions in manufacturing or jeopardize plant and personnel
safety, voltage sag protection may not be justified.
3. Equipment should at least be able to ride through voltage sags with
a minimum voltage of 70 percent (ITI curve). The relative probabil-
ity of experiencing a voltage sag to 70 percent or less of nominal is
much less than experiencing a sag to 90 percent or less of nominal.
A more ideal ride-through capability for short-duration voltage sags
would be 50 percent, as specified by the semiconductor industry in
Standard SEMI F-47.17
As we entertain solutions at higher levels of available power, the
solutions generally become more costly. If the required ride-through
cannot be obtained at the specification stage, it may be possible to
apply an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) system or some other
type of power conditioning to the machine control. This is applicable
when the machines themselves can withstand the sag or interruption,
but the controls would automatically shut them down.
At level 3 in Fig. 3.12, some sort of backup power supply with the
capability to support the load for a brief period is required. Level 4 rep-
resents alterations made to the utility power system to significantly
reduce the number of sags and interruptions.
3.4
Solutions at the End-User Level
Solutions to improve the reliability and performance of a process or
facility can be applied at many different levels. The different technolo-
gies available should be evaluated based on the specific requirements
of the process to determine the optimum solution for improving the
overall voltage sag performance. As illustrated in Fig. 3.12, the solu-
tions can be discussed at the following different levels of application:
1. Protection for small loads [e.g., less than 5 kilovoltamperes (kVA)].
This usually involves protection for equipment controls or small,
individual machines. Many times, these are single-phase loads that
need to be protected.
2. Protection for individual equipment or groups of equipment up to
about 300 kVA.
This usually represents applying power condition-
ing technologies within the facility for protection of critical equip-
ment that can be grouped together conveniently. Since usually not
all the loads in a facility need protection, this can be a very econom-
ical method of dealing with the critical loads, especially if the need
for protection of these loads is addressed at the facility design stage.
60
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

3. Protection for large groups of loads or whole facilities at the low-volt-
age level.
Sometimes such a large portion of the facility is critical
or needs protection that it is reasonable to consider protecting large
groups of loads at a convenient location (usually the service
entrance). New technologies are available for consideration when
large groups of loads need protection.
4. Protection at the medium-voltage level or on the supply system.
If
the whole facility needs protection or improved power quality, solu-
tions at the medium-voltage level can be considered.
The size ranges in these categories are quite arbitrary, and many of the
technologies can be applied over a wider range of sizes. The following
sections describe the major technologies available and the levels where
they can be applied.
3.4.1
Ferroresonant transformers
Ferroresonant transformers, also called constant-voltage transformers
(CVTs), can handle most voltage sag conditions. (See Fig. 3.13.) CVTs
are especially attractive for constant, low-power loads. Variable loads,
especially with high inrush currents, present more of a problem for
CVTs because of the tuned circuit on the output. Ferroresonant trans-
formers are basically 1:1 transformers which are excited high on their
saturation curves, thereby providing an output voltage which is not sig-
nificantly affected by input voltage variations. A typical ferroresonant
transformer schematic circuit diagram is shown in Fig. 3.14.
Figure 3.15 shows the voltage sag ride-through improvement of a
process controller fed from a 120-VAferroresonant transformer. With the
CVT, the process controller can ride through a voltage sag down to 30
percent of nominal, as opposed to 82 percent without one. Notice how the
ride-through capability is held constant at a certain level. The reason for
this is the small power requirement of the process controller, only 15 VA.
Ferroresonant transformers should be sized significantly larger than
the load. Figure 3.16 shows the allowable voltage sag as a percentage
of nominal voltage (that will result in at least 90 percent voltage on the
CVT output) versus ferroresonant transformer loading, as specified by
one manufacturer. At 25 percent of loading, the allowable voltage sag
is 30 percent of nominal, which means that the CVT will output over 90
percent normal voltage as long as the input voltage is above 30 percent.
This is important since the plant voltage rarely falls below 30 percent
of nominal during voltage sag conditions. As the loading is increased,
the corresponding ride-through capability is reduced, and when the fer-
roresonant transformer is overloaded (e.g., 150 percent loading), the
voltage will collapse to zero.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
61
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

62
Chapter Three
Figure 3.13
Examples of commercially available constant-voltage transformers (CVTs)
(www.sola-hevi-duty.com).
LINE IN
PRIMARY
WINDING
NEUTRALIZING
WINDING
COMPENSATING
WINDING
SECONDARY
WINDING
CAPACITOR
LOAD
Figure 3.14
Schematic of ferroresonant constant-voltage transformer.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

3.4.2
Magnetic synthesizers
Magnetic synthesizers use a similar operating principle to CVTs except
they are three-phase devices and take advantage of the three-phase
magnetics to provide improved voltage sag support and regulation for
three-phase loads. They are applicable over a size range from about 15
to 200 kVA and are typically applied for process loads of larger com-
puter systems where voltage sags or steady-state voltage variations are
important issues. A block diagram of the process is shown in Fig. 3.17.
Energy transfer and line isolation are accomplished through the use
of nonlinear chokes. This eliminates problems such as line noise. The
ac output waveforms are built by combining distinct voltage pulses
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
63
Single Loop Process Controller
Time in Cycles
Percent
Voltage
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.1
1
10
100
1000
CBEMA
wout/Ferro Xfmr
w/Ferro Xfmr
Figure 3.15
Voltage sag improvement with ferroresonant transformer.
Percent Loading of Ferroresonant Transformer
Input Voltage
Minimum %
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
25
50
75
100
Figure 3.16
Voltage sag versus ferroresonant transformer loading.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

from saturated transformers. The waveform energy is stored in the sat-
urated transformers and capacitors as current and voltage. This
energy storage enables the output of a clean waveform with little har-
monic distortion. Finally, three-phase power is supplied through a
zigzag transformer. Figure 3.18 shows a magnetic synthesizer’s voltage
sag ride-through capability as compared to the CBEMA curve, as spec-
ified by one manufacturer.*
3.4.3
Active series compensators
Advances in power electronic technologies and new topologies for these
devices have resulted in new options for providing voltage sag ride-
through support to critical loads. One of the important new options is
64
Chapter Three
Waveform Synthesis and
Inductive Energy Storage 
Capacitive Energy
Storage
Input
Output
Energy Transfer and
Line Isolation 
Figure 3.17
Block diagram of magnetic synthesizer.
Sag Duration in Cycles
Trip Voltage
Percent
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.1
1
10
100
1000
CBEMA
Mag. Syn.
Figure 3.18
Magnetic synthesizer voltage sag ride-through capability.
*Liebert Corporation.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

a device that can boost the voltage by injecting a voltage in series with
the remaining voltage during a voltage sag condition. These are
referred to as active series compensation devices. They are available in
size ranges from small single-phase devices (1 to 5 kVA) to very large
devices that can be applied on the medium-voltage systems (2 MVA and
larger). Figure 3.19 is an example of a small single-phase compensator
that can be used to provide ride-through support for single-phase loads.
A one-line diagram illustrating the power electronics that are used
to achieve the compensation is shown in Fig. 3.20. When a distur-
bance to the input voltage is detected, a fast switch opens and the
power is supplied through the series-connected electronics. This cir-
cuit adds or subtracts a voltage signal to the input voltage so that the
output voltage remains within a specified tolerance during the dis-
turbance. The switch is very fast so that the disturbance seen by the
load is less than a quarter cycle in duration. This is fast enough to
avoid problems with almost all sensitive loads. The circuit can pro-
vide voltage boosting of about 50 percent, which is sufficient for
almost all voltage sag conditions.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
65
Figure 3.19
Example of active series com-
pensator for single-phase loads up to about
5 kVA (www.softswitch.com).
H
N
LOAD
Figure 3.20
Topology illustrating the operation of the active series compensator.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

3.4.4
On-line UPS
Figure 3.21 shows a typical configuration of an on-line UPS. In this
design, the load is always fed through the UPS. The incoming ac power
is rectified into dc power, which charges a bank of batteries. This dc
power is then inverted back into ac power, to feed the load. If the incom-
ing ac power fails, the inverter is fed from the batteries and continues to
supply the load. In addition to providing ride-through for power outages,
an on-line UPS provides very high isolation of the critical load from all
power line disturbances. However, the on-line operation increases the
losses and may be unnecessary for protection of many loads.
3.4.5
Standby UPS
A standby power supply (Fig. 3.22) is sometimes termed off-line UPS
since the normal line power is used to power the equipment until a dis-
turbance is detected and a switch transfers the load to the battery-
backed inverter. The transfer time from the normal source to the
battery-backed inverter is important. The CBEMA curve shows that 8
ms is the lower limit on interruption through for power-conscious man-
ufacturers. Therefore a transfer time of 4 ms would ensure continuity of
operation for the critical load. A standby power supply does not typically
provide any transient protection or voltage regulation as does an on-line
UPS. This is the most common configuration for commodity UPS units
available at retail stores for protection of small computer loads.
UPS specifications include kilovoltampere capacity, dynamic and
static voltage regulation, harmonic distortion of the input current and
output voltage, surge protection, and noise attenuation. The specifica-
tions should indicate, or the supplier should furnish, the test conditions
under which the specifications are valid.
3.4.6
Hybrid UPS
Similar in design to the standby UPS, the hybrid UPS (Fig. 3.23) uti-
lizes a voltage regulator on the UPS output to provide regulation to the
66
Chapter Three
Rectifier/
Charger
Inverter
Battery
Bank
Manual
Bypass
Line
Load
Figure 3.21
On-line UPS.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

load and momentary ride-through when the transfer from normal to
UPS supply is made.
3.4.7
Motor-generator sets
Motor-generator (M-G) sets come in a wide variety of sizes and config-
urations. This is a mature technology that is still useful for isolating
critical loads from sags and interruptions on the power system. The
concept is very simple, as illustrated in Fig. 3.24. A motor powered by
the line drives a generator that powers the load. Flywheels on the same
shaft provide greater inertia to increase ride-through time. When the
line suffers a disturbance, the inertia of the machines and the fly-
wheels maintains the power supply for several seconds. This arrange-
ment may also be used to separate sensitive loads from other classes of
disturbances such as harmonic distortion and switching transients.
While simple in concept, M-G sets have disadvantages for some types
of loads:
1. There are losses associated with the machines, although they are
not necessarily larger than those in other technologies described
here.
2. Noise and maintenance may be issues with some installations.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
67
Rectifier/
Charger
Inverter
Battery
Bank
Automatic
Transfer
Switch
Line
Load
Normal Line 
Figure 3.22
Standby UPS.
Rectifier/
Charger
Inverter
Battery
Bank
Ferroresonant
Transformer
Line
Load
Normal Line 
Figure 3.23
Hybrid UPS.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

3. The frequency and voltage drop during interruptions as the machine
slows. This may not work well with some loads.
Another type of M-G set uses a special synchronous generator called
a written-pole motor that can produce a constant 60-Hz frequency as
the machine slows. It is able to supply a constant output by continually
changing the polarity of the rotor’s field poles. Thus, each revolution
can have a different number of poles than the last one. Constant out-
put is maintained as long as the rotor is spinning at speeds between
3150 and 3600 revolutions per minute (rpm). Flywheel inertia allows
the generator rotor to keep rotating at speeds above 3150 rpm once
power shuts off. The rotor weight typically generates enough inertia to
keep it spinning fast enough to produce 60 Hz for 15 s under full load.
Another means of compensating for the frequency and voltage drop
while energy is being extracted is to rectify the output of the generator
and feed it back into an inverter. This allows more energy to be
extracted, but also introduces losses and cost.
3.4.8
Flywheel energy storage systems
Motor-generator sets are only one means to exploit the energy stored in
flywheels. A modern flywheel energy system uses high-speed flywheels
and power electronics to achieve sag and interruption ride-through
from 10 s to 2 min. Figure 3.25 shows an example of a flywheel used in
energy storage systems. While M-G sets typically operate in the open
and are subject to aerodynamic friction losses, these flywheels operate
in a vacuum and employ magnetic bearings to substantially reduce
standby losses. Designs with steel rotors may spin at approximately
10,000 rpm, while those with composite rotors may spin at much higher
speeds. Since the amount of energy stored is proportional to the square
of the speed, a great amount of energy can be stored in a small space.
68
Chapter Three
FLYWHEEL
MOTOR
GENERATOR
LINE
LOAD
Figure 3.24
Block diagram of typical M-G set with flywheel.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The rotor serves as a one-piece storage device, motor, and generator.
To store energy, the rotor is spun up to speed as a motor. When energy
is needed, the rotor and armature act as a generator. As the rotor slows
when energy is extracted, the control system automatically increases
the field to compensate for the decreased voltage. The high-speed fly-
wheel energy storage module would be used in place of the battery in
any of the UPS concepts previously presented.
3.4.9
Superconducting magnetic energy
storage (SMES) devices
An SMES device can be used to alleviate voltage sags and brief inter-
ruptions.2 The energy storage in an SMES-based system is provided by
the electric energy stored in the current flowing in a superconducting
magnet. Since the coil is lossless, the energy can be released almost
instantaneously. Through voltage regulator and inverter banks, this
energy can be injected into the protected electrical system in less than 1
cycle to compensate for the missing voltage during a voltage sag event.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
69
Figure 3.25
Cutaway view of an integrated motor, gen-
erator, and flywheel used for energy storage systems.
(Courtesy of Active Power, Inc.)
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The SMES-based system has several advantages over battery-based
UPS systems:
1. SMES-based systems have a much smaller footprint than batteries
for the same energy storage and power delivery capability.13
2. The stored energy can be delivered to the protected system more
quickly.
3. The SMES system has virtually unlimited discharge and charge
duty cycles. The discharge and recharge cycles can be performed
thousands of times without any degradation to the superconducting
magnet.
The recharge cycle is typically less than 90 s from full discharge.
Figure 3.26 shows the functional block diagram of a common system.
It consists of a superconducting magnet, voltage regulators, capacitor
banks, a dc-to-dc converter, dc breakers, inverter modules, sensing and
control equipment, and a series-injection transformer. The supercon-
ducting magnet is constructed of a niobium titanium (NbTi) conductor
and is cooled to approximately 4.2 kelvin (K) by liquid helium. The
cryogenic refrigeration system is based on a two-stage recondenser.
The magnet electrical leads use high-temperature superconductor
(HTS) connections to the voltage regulator and controls. The magnet
might typically store about 3 megajoules (MJ).
70
Chapter Three
~
=
=
=
=
~
Voltage Regulator
and Controls
Capacitor
Bank
DC-DC
Inverter
DC
Breaker
Inverter
Module
Sensing
and Control
Magnet Power Supply
Superconductor Magnet
(O-Site Connection)
Series-Injection
Transformer
Utility
Grid
Plant
Load
Padmount
Figure 3.26
Typical power quality–voltage regulator (PQ-VR) functional block diagram.
(Courtesy of American Superconductor, Inc.)
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

In the example system shown, energy released from the SMES
passes through a current-to-voltage converter to charge a 14-micro-
farad (mF) dc capacitor bank to 2500 Vdc. The voltage regulator keeps
the dc voltage at its nominal value and also provides protection control
to the SMES. The dc-to-dc converter reduces the dc voltage down to 750
Vdc. The inverter subsystem module consists of six single-phase
inverter bridges. Two IGBT inverter bridges rated 450 amperes (A) rms
are paralleled in each phase to provide a total rating of 900 A per phase.
The switching scheme for the inverter is based on the pulse-width
modulation (PWM) approach where the carrier signal is a sine-triangle
with a frequency of 4 kHz.15
A typical SMES system can protect loads of up to 8 MVA for voltage
sags as low as 0.25 pu. It can provide up to 10 s of voltage sag ride-
through depending on load size. Figure 3.27 shows an example where
the grid voltage experiences a voltage sag of 0.6 pu for approximately 7
cycles. The voltage at the protected load remains virtually unchanged
at its prefault value.
3.4.10
Static transfer switches and fast
transfer switches
There are a number of alternatives for protection of an entire facility
that may be sensitive to voltage sags. These include dynamic voltage
restorers (DVRs) and UPS systems that use technology similar to the
systems described previously but applied at the medium-voltage level.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
71
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.22
0.24
0.26
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
Grid voltage
Load voltage
Voltage (per unit)
Time (ms)
Figure 3.27
SMES-based system providing ride-through during voltage sag event.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

72
Chapter Three
Another alternative that can be applied at either the low-voltage level
or the medium-voltage level is the automatic transfer switch.
Automatic transfer switches can be of various technologies, ranging
from conventional breakers to static switches. Conventional transfer
switches will switch from the primary supply to a backup supply in sec-
onds. Fast transfer switches that use vacuum breaker technology are
available that can transfer in about 2 electrical cycles. This can be fast
enough to protect many sensitive loads. Static switches use power elec-
tronic switches to accomplish the transfer within about a quarter of an
electrical cycle. The transfer switch configuration is shown in Fig. 3.28.
An example medium-voltage installation is shown in Fig. 3.29.
The most important consideration in the effectiveness of a transfer
switch for protection of sensitive loads is that it requires two indepen-
dent supplies to the facility. For instance, if both supplies come from the
same substation bus, then they will both be exposed to the same voltage
sags when there is a fault condition somewhere in the supply system. If
a significant percentage of the events affecting the facility are caused by
faults on the transmission system, the fast transfer switch might have
little benefit for protection of the equipment in the facility.
3.5
Evaluating the Economics of Different
Ride-Through Alternatives
The economic evaluation procedure to find the best option for improv-
ing voltage sag performance consists of the following steps:
Primary Source
12 kV
Alternate Source
12 kV
Static Transfer Switch
Mechanical Automatic
Transfer Switch
Figure 3.28
Configuration of a static transfer switch used
to switch between a primary supply and a backup supply
in the event of a disturbance. The controls would switch
back to the primary supply after normal power is
restored.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Voltage Sags and Interruptions
73
1. Characterize the system power quality performance.
2. Estimate the costs associated with the power quality variations.
3. Characterize the solution alternatives in terms of costs and effec-
tiveness.
4. Perform the comparative economic analysis.
We have already presented the methodology for characterizing the
expected voltage sag performance, and we have outlined the major
technologies that can be used to improve the performance of the facil-
ity. Now, we will focus on evaluating the economics of the different
options.
3.5.1
Estimating the costs for the voltage
sag events
The costs associated with sag events can vary significantly from
nearly zero to several million dollars per event. The cost will vary not
only among different industry types and individual facilities but also
with market conditions. Higher costs are typically experienced if the
end product is in short supply and there is limited ability to make up
for the lost production. Not all costs are easily quantified or truly
reflect the urgency of avoiding the consequences of a voltage sag
event.
The cost of a power quality disturbance can be captured primarily
through three major categories:
■Product-related losses, such as loss of product and materials, lost
production capacity, disposal charges, and increased inventory
requirements.
Figure 3.29
Example of a static transfer switch application
at medium voltage.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Labor-related losses, such as idled employees, overtime, cleanup, and
repair.
■Ancillary costs such as damaged equipment, lost opportunity cost,
and penalties due to shipping delays.
Focusing on these three categories will facilitate the development of a
detailed list of all costs and savings associated with a power quality dis-
turbance. One can also refer to appendix A of IEEE 1346-199818 for a
more detailed explanation of the factors to be considered in determin-
ing the cost of power quality disturbances.
Costs will typically vary with the severity (both magnitude and dura-
tion) of the power quality disturbance. This relationship can often be
defined by a matrix of weighting factors. The weighting factors are
developed using the cost of a momentary interruption as the base. 
Usually, a momentary interruption will cause a disruption to any load
or process that is not specifically protected with some type of energy
storage technology. Voltage sags and other power quality variations will
always have an impact that is some portion of this total shutdown.
If a voltage sag to 40 percent causes 80 percent of the economic
impact that a momentary interruption causes, then the weighting fac-
tor for a 40 percent sag would be 0.8. Similarly, if a sag to 75 percent
only results in 10 percent of the costs that an interruption causes, then
the weighting factor is 0.1.
After the weighting factors are applied to an event, the costs of the
event are expressed in per unit of the cost of a momentary interruption.
The weighted events can then be summed and the total is the total cost
of all the events expressed in the number of equivalent momentary
interruptions.
Table 3.3 provides an example of weighting factors that were used for
one investigation. The weighting factors can be further expanded to dif-
ferentiate between sags that affect all three phases and sags that only
affect one or two phases. Table 3.4 combines the weighting factors with
expected performance to determine a total annual cost associated with
voltage sags and interruptions. The cost is 16.9 times the cost of an
interruption. If an interruption costs $40,000, the total costs associated
with voltage sags and interruptions would be $676,000 per year (see
Chap. 8 for alternative costing methods).
3.5.2
Characterizing the cost and
effectiveness for solution alternatives
Each solution technology needs to be characterized in terms of cost and
effectiveness. In broad terms the solution cost should include initial
procurement and installation expenses, operating and maintenance
expenses, and any disposal and/or salvage value considerations. A thor-
74
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ough evaluation would include less obvious costs such as real estate or
space-related expenses and tax considerations. The cost of the extra
space requirements can be incorporated as a space rental charge and
included with other annual operating expenses. Tax considerations
may have several components, and the net benefit or cost can also be
included with other annual operating expenses. Table 3.5 provides an
example of initial costs and annual operating costs for some general
technologies used to improve performance for voltage sags and inter-
ruptions. These costs are provided for use in the example and should
not be considered indicative of any particular product.
Besides the costs, the solution effectiveness of each alternative needs
to be quantified in terms of the performance improvement that can be
achieved. Solution effectiveness, like power quality costs, will typically
vary with the severity of the power quality disturbance. This relation-
ship can be defined by a matrix of “% sags avoided” values. Table 3.6
illustrates this concept for the example technologies from Table 3.5 as
they might apply to a typical industrial application.
3.5.3
Performing comparative economic
analysis
The process of comparing the different alternatives for improving per-
formance involves determining the total annual cost for each alterna-
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
75
TABLE 3.3
Example of Weighting Factors for Different Voltage Sag Magnitudes
Category of event
Weighting for economic analysis
Interruption
1.0
Sag with minimum voltage below 50%
0.8
Sag with minimum voltage between 50% and 70%
0.4
Sag with minimum voltage between 70% and 90%
0.1
TABLE 3.4
Example of Combining the Weighting Factors with Expected Voltage
Sag Performance to Determine the Total Costs of Power Quality Variations
Weighting for 
Number of 
Total equivalent
Category of event
economic analysis
events per year
interruptions
Interruption
1
5
5
Sag with minimum voltage 
below 50%
0.8
3
2.4
Sag with minimum voltage 
between 50% and 70%
0.4
15
6
Sag with minimum voltage 
between 70% and 90%
0.1
35
3.5
Total
16.9
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tive, including both the costs associated with the voltage sags (remem-
ber that the solutions do not typically eliminate these costs completely)
and the annualized costs of implementing the solution. The objective is
to minimize these annual costs (power quality costs  solution costs).
Comparing the different power quality solution alternatives in terms
of their total annual costs (annual power quality costs  annual power
quality solution costs) identifies those solution(s) with lower costs that
warrant more detailed investigations. The do-nothing solution is gen-
erally included in the comparative analysis and is typically identified
as the base case. The do-nothing solution has a zero annual power qual-
ity solution cost but has the highest annual power quality costs.
Many of the costs (power quality and operation and maintenance)
are by their nature annual costs. The costs associated with purchasing
and installing various solution technologies are one-time up-front costs
that can be annualized using an appropriate interest rate and assumed
lifetime or evaluation period.
Figure 3.30 gives an example of this type of analysis for a typical indus-
trial facility. The facility has a total load of 5 MW, but only about 2 MW of
load needs to be protected to avoid production disruptions. The voltage
sag performance was given in Table 3.4. The costs for an interruption are
$40,000 per event, and the costs for voltage sags are based on the weight-
ing factors given previously. The six options given in Table 3.6 are ana-
lyzed, and the annual costs are presented. The annualized costs are
calculated based on a 15-year life and an interest rate of 10 percent.
76
Chapter Three
TABLE 3.5
Example Costs for Different Types of Power Quality
Improvement Technologies
Operating and 
maintenance costs 
(% of initial
Alternative category
Typical cost
costs per year)
Controls protection (<5 kVA)
CVTs
$1000/kVA
10
UPS
$500/kVA
25
Dynamic sag corrector
$250/kVA
5
Machine protection (10–300 kVA)
UPS
$500/kVA
15
Flywheel
$500/kVA
7
Dynamic sag corrector
$200/kVA
5
Facility protection (2–10 MVA)
UPS
$500/kVA
15
Flywheel
$500/kVA
5
DVR (50% voltage boost)
$300/kVA
5
Static switch (10 MVA)
$600,000
5
Fast transfer switch (10 MVA)
$150,000
5
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

TABLE 3.6
Effectiveness of the Power Quality Improvement Options for a Particular Example Case*
Sags, %
Interruption,
Minimum
Minimum voltage between 
Minimum voltage 
%
voltage below 50%
between 50% and 70%
between 70% and 90%
CVT (controls)
0
20
70
100
Dynamic sag corrector/DVR
0
20
90
100
Flywheel ride-through 
technologies
70
100
100
100
UPS (battery ride-through 
technologies)
100
100
100
100
Static switch
100
80
70
50
Fast transfer switch
80
70
60
40
77
*The entries in this table represent the percentage of voltage sags or interruptions in each category that
are corrected to levels that will no longer cause equipment impacts in the facility.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

It is interesting to note that all the options reduce the total annual
costs (in other words, any of these options would have a net benefit to
the facility with the assumed interest rate and lifetime when compared
to the existing conditions). It is also interesting that the best solution
in this case involves applying equipment on the utility side (fast trans-
fer switch). However, this has a major assumption that a backup feeder
would be available and that there would be no charge from the utility
for providing a connection to this backup feeder except for the equip-
ment and operating costs.
More commonly, the solution would be implemented in the facility and
either a dynamic sag corrector or flywheel-based standby power supply
might make sense for protecting the 2 MW of sensitive loads. In this case,
protecting just the controls with CVTs does not provide the best solution
because the machines themselves are sensitive to voltage sags.
3.6
Motor-Starting Sags
Motors have the undesirable effect of drawing several times their full
load current while starting. This large current will, by flowing through
system impedances, cause a voltage sag which may dim lights, cause
78
Chapter Three
$0
$100,000
$200,000
$300,000
$400,000
$500,000
$600,000
$700,000
Base Case
CVTs for
Controls
Only
Series
Compensators
for Individual
Machines
Flywheel
or SMES
Protection of
Machines
UPS for
Machines
Static
Transfer
Switch
Fast
Transfer
Switch
(Vacuum)
Solution Cost
PQ Cost
Figure 3.30
Example of comparing solution alternatives with the base case using total
annualized costs.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

contactors to drop out, and disrupt sensitive equipment. The situation
is made worse by an extremely poor starting displacement factor—usu-
ally in the range of 15 to 30 percent.
The time required for the motor to accelerate to rated speed increases
with the magnitude of the sag, and an excessive sag may prevent the
motor from starting successfully. Motor starting sags can persist for
many seconds, as illustrated in Fig. 3.31.
3.6.1
Motor-starting methods
Energizing the motor in a single step (full-voltage starting) provides low
cost and allows the most rapid acceleration. It is the preferred method
unless the resulting voltage sag or mechanical stress is excessive.
Autotransformer starters have two autotransformers connected in
open delta. Taps provide a motor voltage of 80, 65, or 50 percent of sys-
tem voltage during start-up. Line current and starting torque vary
with the square of the voltage applied to the motor, so the 50 percent
tap will deliver only 25 percent of the full-voltage starting current and
torque. The lowest tap which will supply the required starting torque
is selected.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
79
PQNode Local
Trigger
QC_LD2
Phase A-B Voltage
RMS Variation
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
Time (s)
Duration
2.800 s
Min
80.55
Ave
88.13
Max
102.5
BMI/Electrotek
Voltage (%)
Figure 3.31
Typical motor-starting voltage sag.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Resistance and reactance starters initially insert an impedance in
series with the motor. After a time delay, this impedance is shorted out.
Starting resistors may be shorted out over several steps; starting reac-
tors are shorted out in a single step. Line current and starting torque
vary directly with the voltage applied to the motor, so for a given start-
ing voltage, these starters draw more current from the line than with
autotransformer starters, but provide higher starting torque. Reactors
are typically provided with 50, 45, and 37.5 percent taps.
Part-winding starters are attractive for use with dual-rated motors
(220/440 V or 230/460 V). The stator of a dual-rated motor consists of
two windings connected in parallel at the lower voltage rating, or in
series at the higher voltage rating. When operated with a part-winding
starter at the lower voltage rating, only one winding is energized ini-
tially, limiting starting current and starting torque to 50 percent of the
values seen when both windings are energized simultaneously.
Delta-wye starters connect the stator in wye for starting and then,
after a time delay, reconnect the windings in delta. The wye connection
reduces the starting voltage to 57 percent of the system line-line voltage;
starting current and starting torque are reduced to 33 percent of their
values for full-voltage start.
3.6.2
Estimating the sag severity during
full-voltage starting
As shown in Fig. 3.31, starting an induction motor results in a steep dip
in voltage, followed by a gradual recovery. If full-voltage starting is
used, the sag voltage, in per unit of nominal system voltage, is
VMin(pu) 
where V(pu)  actual system voltage, in per unit of nominal
kVALR  motor locked rotor kVA
kVASC  system short-circuit kVA at motor
Figure 3.32 illustrates the results of this computation for sag to 90 per-
cent of nominal voltage, using typical system impedances and motor
characteristics.
If the result is above the minimum allowable steady-state voltage for
the affected equipment, then the full-voltage starting is acceptable. If
not, then the sag magnitude versus duration characteristic must be
compared to the voltage tolerance envelope of the affected equipment.
The required calculations are fairly complicated and best left to a
motor-starting or general transient analysis computer program. The
following data will be required for the simulation:
V(pu)  kVASC

kVALR  kVASC
80
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Parameter values for the standard induction motor equivalent cir-
cuit: R1, X1, R2, X2, and XM.
■Number of motor poles and rated rpm (or slip).
■WK2 (inertia constant) values for the motor and the motor load.
■Torque versus speed characteristic for the motor load.
3.7
Utility System Fault-Clearing Issues
Utility feeder design and fault-clearing practices have a great influence
on the voltage sag and interruption performance at a distribution-con-
nected load.12 Ways to improve the performance will now be explored.
Utilities have two basic options to continue to reduce the number and
severity of faults on their system:
1. Prevent faults.
2. Modify fault-clearing practices.
Utilities derive important benefits from activities that prevent faults.
These activities not only result in improved customer satisfaction, but
prevent costly damage to power system equipment. Fault prevention
activities include tree trimming, adding line arresters, insulator wash-
ing, and adding animal guards. Insulation on utility lines cannot be
expected to withstand all lightning strokes. However, any line that
shows a high susceptibility to lightning-induced faults should be inves-
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
81
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%
60%
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Motor kVA (% of Transformer)
Transformer kVA
Figure 3.32
Typical motor versus transformer size for full-voltage starting sags of 90
percent.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tigated. On transmission lines, shielding can be analyzed for its effec-
tiveness in reducing direct lightning strokes. Tower footing resistance
is an important factor in backflashovers from static wire to a phase
wire. If the tower footing resistance is high, the surge energy from a
lightning stroke will not be absorbed by the ground as quickly. On dis-
tribution feeders, shielding may also be an option as is placing
arresters along the line frequently. Of course, one of the main problems
with overhead distribution feeders is that storms blow tree limbs into
the lines. In areas where the vegetation grows quickly, it is a formida-
ble task to keep trees properly trimmed.
Improved fault-clearing practices may include adding line reclosers,
eliminating fast tripping, adding loop schemes, and modifying feeder
design. These practices may reduce the number and/or duration of
momentary interruptions and voltage sags, but utility system faults
can never be eliminated completely.
3.7.1
Overcurrent coordination principles
It is important to understand the operation of the utility system during
fault conditions. There are certain physical limitations to interrupting
the fault current and restoring power. This places certain minimum
requirements on loads that are expected to survive such events with-
out disruption. There are also some things that can be done better on
the utility system to improve the power quality than on the load side.
Therefore, we will address the issues relevant to utility fault clearing
with both the end user (or load equipment designer) and the utility
engineer in mind.
There are two fundamental types of faults on power systems:
1. Transient (temporary) faults.
These are faults due to such things
as overhead line flashovers that result in no permanent damage to
the system insulation. Power can be restored as soon as the fault arc
is extinguished. Automatic switchgear can do this within a few sec-
onds. Some transient faults are self-clearing.
2. Permanent faults.
These are faults due to physical damage to some
element of the insulation system that requires intervention by a line
crew to repair. The impact on the end user is an outage that lasts
from several minutes to a few hours.
The chief objective of the utility system fault-clearing process,
besides personnel safety, is to limit the damage to the distribution sys-
tem. Therefore, the detection of faults and the clearing of the fault cur-
rent must be done with the maximum possible speed without resulting
in false operations for normal transient events.
82
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The two greatest concerns for damage are typically
1. Arcing damage to conductors and bushings
2. Through-fault damage to substation transformers, where the
windings become displaced by excessive forces, resulting in a
major failure
A radial distribution system is designed so that only one fault inter-
rupter must operate to clear a fault. For permanent faults, that same
device, or another, operates to sectionalize the feeder. That is, the
faulted section is isolated so that power may be restored to the rest of
the loads served from the sound sections. Orchestrating this process is
referred to as the coordination of the overcurrent protection devices.
While this is simple in concept, some of the behaviors of the devices
involved can be quite complex. What is remarkable about this is that
nearly all of the process is performed automatically by autonomous
devices employing only local intelligence.
Overcurrent protection devices appear in series along a feeder. For
permanent fault coordination, the devices operate progressively slower
as one moves from the ends of the feeders toward the substation. This
helps ensure the proper sectionalizing of the feeder so that only the
faulted section is isolated. However, this principle is often violated for
temporary faults, particularly if fuse saving is employed. The typical
hierarchy of overcurrent protection devices on a feeder is
1. Feeder breaker in the substation.
This is a circuit breaker capable
of interrupting typically 40 kA of current and controlled by separate
relays. When the available fault current is less than 20 kA, it is com-
mon to find reclosers used in this application.
2. Line reclosers mounted on poles at midfeeder.
The simplest are self-
contained with hydraulically operated timing, interrupting, and
reclosing mechanisms. Others have separate electronic controls.
3. Fuses on many lateral taps off the main feeder.
The power quality issues relating to the placement and operation of
these devices are now explored.
3.7.2
Fuses
The most basic overcurrent protective element on the system is a fuse.
Fuses are relatively inexpensive and maintenance-free. For those rea-
sons, they are generally used in large numbers on most utility distrib-
ution systems to protect individual transformers and feeder branches
(sometimes called laterals or lateral branches). Figure 3.33 shows a
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
83
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

typical overhead line fused cutout. The fundamental purpose of fuses is
to operate on permanent faults and isolate (sectionalize) the faulted
section from the sound portion of the feeder. They are positioned so that
the smallest practical section of the feeder is disturbed.
Fuses detect overcurrent by melting the fuse element, which gener-
ally is made of a metal such as tin or silver. This initiates some sort of
arcing action that will lead to the interruption of the current. There are
two basic kinds of fuse technologies used in power systems:
1. Expulsion fuses (as in Fig. 3.33)
2. Current-limiting fuses (see Sec. 3.7.11)
The essential difference between the two is the way the arc is
quenched. This also gives the fuses different power quality character-
istics. An explusion fuse creates an arc inside a tube with an ablative
coating. This creates high-pressure gases that expel the arc plasma and
fuse remnants out the bottom of the cutout, often with a loud report
similar to a firearm. This cools the arc such that it will not reignite
after the alternating current naturally goes through zero. This can be
as short as one-half cycle for high currents to several cycles for low fault
currents. This determines the duration of the voltage sag observed at
loads. An expulsion fuse is considerably less expensive than a current-
limiting fuse.
A current-limiting fuse dissipates the energy in the arc in a closed
environment, typically by melting a special sand within an insulating
tube. This process actually quenches the arc very quickly, forcing the
84
Chapter Three
Figure 3.33
Typical utility fused cutout
with expulsion fuse. (Courtesy of Cooper
Power Systems.)
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

current to zero before that would naturally occur. This can have some
beneficial impacts on the voltage sag characteristics (see Fig. 3.45).
Because it is based on a piece of metal that must accumulate heat
until it reaches its melting temperature, it takes a fuse different
amounts of time to operate at different levels of fault current. The time
decreases as the current level increases, giving a fuse its distinctive
inverse time-current characteristic (TCC), as shown in Fig. 3.34. To
achieve full-range coordination with fuses, all other overcurrent pro-
tective devices in the distribution system must adopt this same basic
shape. The fuse TCC is typically given as a band between two curves as
shown. The leftmost edge represents the minimum melting time, while
the rightmost edge represents the maximum clearing time for different
current levels.
Some aspects of coordinating with the fuse characteristic relevant to
power quality are as follows:
1. If the utility employs fuse saving on temporary faults, the coordi-
nating fault interrupter must have a TCC to the left of the minimum
melting curve.
2. For a permanent fault, the coordinating device must have a TCC to
the right of the clearing curve to allow the fuse to melt and clear
first. Otherwise, many other customers will be interrupted.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
85
Time
5
50
500
5000
50000
Current
0.010
0.10
1
10
100
1000
Figure 3.34
The inverse time-current characteristic of a fuse that dictates the shape of
the characteristic of all other devices for series overcurrent coordination.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

3. Repeated fault currents, inrush currents from reclosing, and light-
ning stroke currents can damage the fuse element, generally shift-
ing the TCC to the left. This will result in inadvertent interruptions
of customers downline from the fuse.
4. For high current values with operating time less than 0.1 s, it is dif-
ficult to guarantee that an upline mechanical fault interrupter will
be able to save the fuse.
3.7.3
Reclosing
Because most faults on overhead lines are transient, the power can be
successfully restored within several cycles after the current is inter-
rupted. Thus, most automatic circuit breakers are designed to reclose 2
or 3 times, if needed, in rapid succession. The multiple operations are
designed to permit various sectionalizing schemes to operate and to give
some more persistent transient faults a second chance to clear. There are
special circuit breakers for utility distribution systems called, appropri-
ately, reclosers, that were designed to perform the fault interruption and
reclosing function particularly well. The majority of faults will be cleared
on the first operation. Figure 3.35 shows a typical single-phase recloser
and Figs. 3.36 and 3.37 show two different three-phase designs in com-
mon usage. These devices are generally pole-mounted on overhead util-
ity lines, although a pad-mounted version also exists. The oil-insulated
designs are the most common, but sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)–insulated
and encapsulated solid dielectric designs are also popular.
These devices can be found in numerous places along distribution
feeders and sometimes in substations. They are typically applied at the
head of sections subjected to numerous temporary faults. However,
they may be applied nearly anywhere a convenient, low-cost primary-
side circuit breaker is needed.
Because they are designed for fuse-saving (fast tripping) applica-
tions, reclosers are some of the fastest mechanical fault interrupters
employed on the utility system. While they are typically rated for no
faster than 3 to 6 cycles, many examples of interruptions as short as 1.5
cycles have been observed with power quality monitors. This can be
beneficial to limiting sag durations. Where fast tripping is not
employed, the recloser control will commonly delay operation to more
than 6 cycles to allow time for downline fuses to clear.
Reclosing is quite prevalent in North American utility systems.
Utilities in regions of low lightning incidence may reclose only once
because they assume that the majority of their faults will be perma-
nent. In lightning-prone regions, it is common to attempt to clear the
fault as many as 4 times. Figure 3.38 illustrates the two most common
sequences in use on four-shot reclosers:
86
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Voltage Sags and Interruptions
87
Figure 3.35
Typical pole-mounted, oil-insulated sin-
gle-phase line recloser. (Courtesy of Cooper Power
Systems.)
Figure 
3.36
Typical 
standard
three-phase 
oil-insulated 
line
recloser 
with 
vacuum 
inter-
rupters. (Courtesy of Cooper Power
Systems.)
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

1. One fast operation, three delayed
2. Two fast, two delayed
See Sec. 3.7.4 for a more detailed explanation of fast and delayed oper-
ations. Reclosers tend to have uniform reclose intervals between oper-
ations. The original hydraulic reclosers were limited to about 1 to 2 s,
and this setting has been retained by many utilities although modern
electronically controlled reclosers can be set for any value. It is common
for the first reclose interval on some types of reclosers to be set for
instantaneous reclose, which will result in closure in 12 to 30 cycles (0.2
to 0.5 s). This is done to reduce the time of the interruption and improve
the power quality. However, there are some conflicts created by this,
such as with DG disconnecting times (see Sec. 9.5.2).
Substation circuit breakers often have a different style of reclosing
sequence as shown in Fig. 3.39. This stems from a different evolution
of relaying technology. Reclosing times are counted from the first trip-
ping signal of the first operation. Thus, the common “0-15-45” operat-
ing sequence recloses essentially as fast as possible on the first
operation, with approximately 15- and 30-s intervals between the next
two operations.
Although the terminology may differ, modern breakers and reclosers
can both be set to have the same operating sequences to meet load
88
Chapter Three
Figure 3.37
Newer three-phase line recloser with vacuum inter-
rupters encapsulated in solid dielectric insulation. (Courtesy of
Cooper Power Systems.)
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

power quality requirements. Utilities generally choose one technology
over the other based on cost or construction standards.
It is generally fruitless to have automatic reclosers on distribution
circuits with underground cable unless a significant portion of the sys-
tem is overhead and exposed to trees or lightning.
3.7.4
Fuse saving
Ideally, utility engineers would like to avoid blowing fuses needlessly on
transient faults because a line crew must be dispatched to change them.
Line reclosers were designed specifically to help save fuses. Substation
circuit breakers can use instantaneous ground relaying to accomplish
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
89
1 FAST, 3 DELAYED
2 FAST, 2 DELAYED
RECLOSE INTERVAL
TYPICALLY 1 - 2 S *
* FIRST RECLOSE INTERVAL MAY BE
“INSTANTANEOUS” OR 12–30 CYCLES
Figure 3.38
Common reclosing sequences for line reclosers in use in the United States.
“0 - 15 - 45 SEQUENCE”
12–30 CYCLES
15  S
45  S
Figure 3.39
A common reclosing sequence for substation breakers in the United States.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the same thing. The basic idea is to have the mechanical circuit-inter-
rupting device operate very quickly on the first operation so that it clears
before any fuses downline from it have a chance to melt. When the device
closes back in, power is fully restored in the majority of the cases and no
human intervention is required. The only inconvenience to the customer
is a slight blink. This is called the fast operation of the device, or the
instantaneous trip.
If the fault is still there upon reclosing, there are two options in com-
mon usage:
1. Switch to a slow, or delayed, tripping characteristic.
This is fre-
quently the only option for substation circuit breakers; they will
operate only one time on the instantaneous trip. This philosophy
assumes that the fault is now permanent and switching to a delayed
operation will give a downline fuse time to operate and clear the
fault by isolating the faulted section.
2. Try a second fast operation.
This philosophy is used where experi-
ence has shown a significant percentage of transient faults need two
chances to clear while saving the fuses. Some line constructions and
voltage levels have a greater likelihood that a lightning-induced arc
may reignite and need a second chance to clear. Also, a certain per-
centage of tree faults will burn free if given a second shot.
Many utilities have abandoned fuse saving in selected areas due to
complaints about power quality. The fast, or instantaneous, trip is
eliminated so that breakers and reclosers have only time-delayed oper-
ations (see Sec. 3.7.6).
3.7.5
Reliability
The term reliability in the utility context usually refers to the amount
of time end users are totally without power for an extended period of
time (i.e., a sustained interruption). Definitions of what constitutes a
sustained interruption vary among utilities from 1 to 5 min. This is
what many utilities refer to as an “outage.” Current power quality
standards efforts are leaning toward calling any interruption of power
for longer than 1 min a sustained interruption (see Chap. 2). In any
case, reliability is affected by the permanent faults on the system that
must be repaired before service can be restored.
Of course, many industrial end users have a different view of what
constitutes reliability because even momentary interruptions for tran-
sient faults can knock their processes off-line and require several hours
to get back into production. There is a movement to extend the tradi-
tional reliability indices to include momentary interruptions as well.
90
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The traditional reliability indices for utility distribution systems are
defined as follows8:
SAIFI: System average interruption frequency index
SAIFI 
SAIDI: System average interruption duration index
SAIDI 
CAIFI: Customer average interruption frequency index
CAIFI 
CAIDI: Customer average interruption duration index
CAIDI 
ASAI: Average system availability index
ASAI 
where customer hours service demand  8760 for an entire year.
Typical target values for these indices are
Index
Target
SAIFI
1.0
SAIDI
1.0–1.5 h
CAIDI
1.0–1.5 h
ASAI
0.99983
These are simply design targets, and actual values can, of course, vary
significantly from this. Burke9 reports the results of a survey in which
the average SAIFI was 1.18, SAIDI was 76.93 min, CAIDI was 76.93
min, and ASAI was 0.999375. We have experience with utilities whose
SAIFI is usually around 0.5 and SAIDI is between 2.0 and 3.0 h. This
means that the fault rate was lower than typical, at least for the bulk
of the customers, but the time to repair the faults was longer. This
could be common for feeders with mixed urban and rural sections. The
customer hours service availability

customer hours service demand
Σ customer interruption durations

total no. customer interruptions
total no. customer interruptions

no. customers affected
Σ (no. customers affected) (duration of outage) 

total no. customers
(no. customers interrupted) (no. of interruptions) 

total no. customers
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
91
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

faults are more common in the rural sections, but fewer customers are
affected and it takes longer to find and repair faults.
3.7.6
Impact of eliminating fuse saving
One of the more common ways of dealing with complaints about
momentary interruptions is to disable the fast-tripping, or fuse-saving,
feature of the substation breaker or recloser. This avoids interrupting
the entire feeder for a fault on a tap. This has been a very effective way
many utilities have found to deal with complaints about the quality of
the power. It simply minimizes the number of people inconvenienced by
any single event. The penalty is that customers on the affected fused
tap will suffer a sustained interruption until the fuse can be replaced,
even for a transient fault. There is also an additional cost to the utility
to make the trouble call, and it can have an adverse impact on the reli-
ability indices by which some utilities are graded.
In a Utility Power Quality Practices survey conducted in 1991 by
Cooper Power Systems for EPRI Project RP3098-1,7 40 percent of par-
ticipating utilities indicated that they have responded to customer
complaints by removing fast tripping. Sixty percent of participating
investor-owned utilities (IOUs) but only 30 percent of participating
public power utilities (largely rural electric cooperatives) indicated
that they followed this practice. This may validate a widely held belief
that customer sensitivity to momentary interruptions is much greater
in urban areas than in rural areas. Since the time of this survey, our
experience would indicate this trend is continuing, if not accelerating.
This solution to power quality complaints does not sit well with many
utility engineers. They would prefer the optimal technical and eco-
nomical solution, which would make use of the fast-trip capability of
breakers and reclosers. This not only saves operating costs, but it
improves the reliability indices by which utility performance is mea-
sured. Momentary interruptions have traditionally not been reported
in these indices, but only the permanent outages. However, when we
consider the economic impact of both the end user and the utility (i.e.,
a value-based analysis), the utility costs can be swamped by the costs
to industrial end users.11
If the utility has been in the practice of fuse saving, there will gen-
erally be some additional costs to remove fast tripping. For example,
the fused cutouts along the main feed may have to be changed for bet-
ter coordination. In some cases, additional lateral fuses will have to be
added so that the main feeder is better protected from faults on
branches. Considering engineering time, estimates for the cost of insti-
tuting this may be from $20,000 to $40,000 per feeder. Additional oper-
ating costs to change fuses that would not have blown otherwise may
be as high as $2000 per year.
92
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

While these costs may seem high, they can appear relatively small if
we compare them to the costs of an end user such as a plastic bag man-
ufacturer who can sell all the output of the plant. A single breaker oper-
ation can cost $3000 to $10,000 in lost production and extra labor
charges. Thus, it is economical in the global, or value-based, sense to
remove fast tripping if at least three to five interruptions (momentary
and sustained combined) are eliminated each year.
The impact on the reliability indices is highly dependent on the
structure of the feeder and what other sectionalizing is done. The
impact can be negligible if the critical industrial load is close to the sub-
station and the rest of the feeder can be isolated with a line recloser
that does employ fast tripping. The farther out the feeder one goes with
no fuse saving, the greater the impact on the reliability indices.
Therefore, it is advantageous to limit the area of vulnerability to as
small an area as possible and to feed sensitive customers with a high
economic value of service as close to substations as possible. See Sec.
3.7.7 for more details.
Removing fast tripping will not eliminate all events that cause prob-
lems for industrial users. It will only eliminate most of the momentary
interruptions. However, it will do nothing for voltage sags due to faults
on the transmission system, other feeders, or even on fused laterals.
These events can account for one-half to two-thirds of the events that
disrupt industrial processes. As a rule of thumb, removing fast tripping
will eliminate about one-third of the industrial process disruptions in
areas where lightning-induced faults are a problem. Of course, this fig-
ure will depend on the types of processes being served by the feeder.
A particular problem is when there are faults close to the substation
on other feeders, or even the same feeder, but on fused taps. This
causes a deep sag on all feeders connected to the bus. Two approaches
that have been proposed to deal with this are to (1) install reactors on
each line coming from the substation bus to limit the maximum bus sag
to about 60 percent12 and (2) install current-limiting fuses on all branch
laterals near the substation so that sags are very brief (see Sec. 3.7.11).
Residential end users may be quite vocal about the number of inter-
ruptions they experience, but, in most cases, there is little direct eco-
nomic impact for a momentary interruption. Perhaps, the biggest
nuisance is resetting the dozen or so digital clocks found in households.
In fact, there may be more cases of adverse economic impact if fast trip-
ping were eliminated. For example, homes with sump pumps may suf-
fer more cases of flooded basements if they suffer sustained
interruptions because their lateral fuse blew for a temporary fault dur-
ing a thunderstorm. Some utilities have taken another approach with
the residential complaint problem by employing instantaneous reclos-
ing on residential feeders while retaining the fast tripping. By getting
the reclose interval down to 12 to 20 cycles, the momentary interrup-
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
93
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tion is so brief that the majority of digital clocks seem to be able to ride
through it. This would not be fast enough to help with larger industrial
loads. However, there is mounting anecdotal evidence that many more
modern loads such as adjustable-speed drives are now able to ride
through these brief interruptions. Instantaneous reclosing is not
always possible, particularly, if distributed generation is served from
the feeder.
One unintended consequence of eliminating fast tripping may be
more substation transformer failures. Reclosers operate 4 times by
default before locking out. On some designs, dialing out the fast trips
will simply result in four delayed operations for permanent faults.
There is almost never a reason for four delayed operations. This sub-
jects the substation transformer to unnecessary through-fault current
events, which will shorten the life of the transformer. The number of
delayed operations should be decreased to two if there are only fuses
downline to coordinate with. If there are other mechanical interrupters
or sectionalizers, three operations may be needed.
3.7.7
Increased sectionalizing
The typical utility primary distribution feeder in the United States is a
radial feed from the substation breaker. In its simplest form, it consists
of a main three-phase feeder with fused one-phase and three-phase
taps as shown in Fig. 3.40.
The first step in sectionalizing the feeder further to improve overall
reliability is to add a line recloser as shown in Fig. 3.41. If only tradi-
tional reliability is of concern, one might place the recloser halfway
down the feeder or at the half-load point. For power quality concerns,
it might be better for the recloser to be located closer to the substation,
depending on the location of critical loads. One possible criterion is to
place it at the first point where the fault current has dropped to where
one can nearly always guarantee coordination with the fuses on fast
tripping. Another would be to place the recloser just downline from the
bulk of the critical loads that are likely to complain about momentary
interruptions.
With this concept, the fast tripping can be removed from the substa-
tion breaker while only sacrificing fuse saving on a small portion of the
feeder. As pointed out previously, it is often difficult to achieve fuse sav-
ing near the substation anyway. A special effort is made to keep the
first section of the main feeder free of transient faults. This would
include more frequent maintenance such as tree trimming and insula-
tor washing. Also, extraordinary measures can be taken to prevent
lightning flashover, for example, line shielding or the application of line
arresters at least every two or three spans.
94
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The question about how much the reliability is compromised by elim-
inating the fast tripping is often raised. We performed a reliability
analysis on a number of feeders to study this. One feeder used in the
study was a single main feeder concept like that in Fig. 3.40, except
that the single-phase laterals were uniformly spaced down the feeder.
We used the urban feeder described by Warren10 as the prototype. We’ll
refer to this as feeder 1. It is a uniform, 8-mi feeder with identical fused
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
95
Substation
Breaker
Main feeder
Fuse
1-phase and 
3-phase branches
Substation
Breaker
Line
recloser
added
These fuses
may be difficult
to save from
high fault current
Reduced number of
momentary
interruptions
Figure 3.40
Typical main line feeder construction with fused taps.
Figure 3.41
Adding a line recloser to the main feeder as the first step in sectionalizing.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

taps every 0.25 mi and a total load of 6400 kVA. While this may not be
a realistic feeder, it is a good feeder for study so that the general trends
of certain actions can be determined. We assumed values of 0.1
faults/yr/mi on the main feeder and 0.25 faults/yr/mi on the fused taps,
with 80 percent of the faults being transient. A uniform repair time of
3 h was assumed for permanent faults.
We first looked at the base case (case 1 in Table 3.7) assuming that
the utility was employing fuse saving and that 100 percent of the fuses
could be saved on transient faults. For case 2, the fast tripping of the
substation breaker was disabled and it was assumed that none of the
tap fuses could be saved. Finally, for case 3, we placed a three-phase
recloser 1 mi from the substation and assumed that all fuses downline
were saved. The resulting SAIFI and SAIDI reliability indices are
shown in Table 3.7.
Typical target values for both SAIFI and SAIDI (in hours) in an urban
environment are 1.0. While none of these cases are particularly bad, it
is apparent that removing fast tripping has a very significant negative
effect on the reliability indices (compare case 2 with case 1). The SAIFI
increases by about 60 percent. This example involves a very regular,
well-sectionalized feeder with a fuse on every tap, where a blown fuse
takes out less than 3 percent of the customers. For other feeder struc-
tures, the effect can be more pronounced (see the following discussion on
feeder 2), but this serves to illustrate the point that the reliability can
be expected to deteriorate when fast tripping is eliminated.
The SAIDI increases only slightly. The largest change is in the num-
ber of fuse operations, which increased by a factor of 5. Thus, the util-
ity can expect considerably more trouble calls during stormy weather.
If we would subsequently add a line recloser as described for case
3, the reliability indices and number of fuse operations return to
almost the same values as the base case. In fact, the reliability
indices are slightly better because of the increased sectionalizing in
the line, although there are more nuisance fuse blowings in the first
section than in case 1. Thus, if we also place a line recloser past the
majority of the critical loads, eliminating fast tripping at the substa-
tion will probably not have a significant negative impact on overall
reliability. Of course, this assumes that the more critical loads are
close to the substation.
96
Chapter Three
TABLE 3.7
Reliability Indices Computed for Feeder 1
Case
SAIFI
SAIDI (h)
Annual fuse operations
1
0.184
0.551
1.2
2
0.299
0.666
6.0
3
0.182
0.516
1.88
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

We studied the same three cases for another feeder, which we will
call feeder 2. This feeder is, perhaps, more typical of mixed urban and
rural feeders in much of the United States. Space does not allow a com-
plete description of the topology. The main difference from feeder 1 is
that the feeder structure is more random and the sectionalizing is
much more coarse with far fewer lateral fuses. The fault rate was
assumed to be the same as for feeder 1. The SAIFI and SAIDI for the
three cases for feeder 2 are shown in Table 3.8. The number of fuse
blowings has not been computed.
For feeder 2, many more customers are inconvenienced by each fuse
blowing. Thus, the SAIFI jumps by more than a factor of 3 when fast
tripping is removed. This emphasizes the need for good sectionalizing
of the feeder to keep the impact on reliability at a minimum. As with
feeder 1, the case 3 reliability indices return to nearly the same values
as case 1.
What about the power quality? Those customers in the first section
of line are going to see much improved power quality as well as
improved reliability. In our study of feeder 1, the average number of
interruptions, both momentary and sustained, dropped from 15 per
year to a little more than 1 per year. This is a dramatic improvement!
Unfortunately, the number of interruptions for the remainder of the
customers—downline from the recloser—remain unchanged. What can
be done about this?
The first temptation is to add another line recloser farther down on
the main feeder. The customers served from the portion of the feeder
between the reclosers will see an improvement. If we place the second
recloser 4 mi downline on our uniform 8-mi feeder example, the aver-
age annual interruption rate drops to about 8.3. However, again, the
customers at the end will see less improvement on the number of inter-
ruptions.
One can continue placing additional line reclosers in series on the
main feeder and larger branch feeders to achieve even greater section-
alizing while still retaining desirable practices like fuse saving. In this
way, the portion of the feeder disturbed by a fault decreases. This will
generally improve the reliability (with diminishing returns) but may
not have much effect on the perceived power quality.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
97
TABLE 3.8
Reliability Indices for Feeder 2
Case
SAIFI
SAIDI (h)
1
0.43
1.28
2
1.51
2.37
3
0.47
1.29
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The actions that have the most effect on the number of interruptions
on the portion of the feeder that is downline from the recloser are
1. Reduce the fault rate by tree trimming, line arresters, animal
guards, or other fault prevention techniques.
2. Provide more parallel paths into the service area.
3. Do not trip phases that are not involved in the fault (see Sec. 3.7.10).
There are at least two options for providing additional parallel paths:
1. Build more conventional feeders from the substation.
2. Use more three-phase branches from the main feeder to serve the
load.
The first approach is fairly straightforward: Simply build a new feeder
from the substation out. This could certainly improve the reliability
and power quality by simply reducing the number of customers incon-
venienced by each interruption, but this may not be an economical
alternative. It also may not achieve as great of an improvement in the
interruption rate as some of the approaches associated with the second
option. Let’s investigate further the second idea: using more three-
phase branches off the main feeder, which has the potential of being
less costly in most cases.
There are two concepts being put forward. The first involves coming
out a short distance from the substation and dividing the feeder into
two or three subfeeders. This could typically cut the number of inter-
ruptions by almost one-half or two-thirds, respectively, when compared
to serving the same customers with a single, long main feeder. The
point at which this branch occurs is a little beyond the point where it
becomes practical to save lateral fuses on temporary faults. A three-
phase recloser is placed in each branch near this point. It would be wise
to separate the reclosers by some distance of line to reduce the chances
of sympathetic tripping, where a recloser on the unfaulted branch trips
as a result of the transient currents related to the fault. Figure 3.42
depicts how this principle might be put into practice on an existing
feeder with minimal rebuilding, assuming the existence of three-phase
feeders of sufficient conductor size in the locations indicated.
The second proposal, as depicted in Fig. 3.43, is to first build a highly
reliable main feeder that extends a significant distance into the service
area. Very few loads are actually served directly off this main feeder.
Instead, the loads are served off three-phase branch feeders that are
tapped off the main feeder periodically. A three-phase line recloser is
used at the head of each branch feeder. Of course, there is no fast trip-
98
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ping at the substation to limit momentary interruptions on the main
feeder. Special efforts will be made to prevent faults on this part of the
feeder. Essentially, the main feeder becomes an extension of the sub-
station bus that is permitted by design to have a few more faults over
its lifetime than the bus. And the branch feeders are analogous to hav-
ing separate feeds to each part of the service area directly from the sub-
station, but, hopefully, with considerably less cost.
Whether either of these ideas is suitable for a particular utility is
dependent on many factors including terrain, load density, load distri-
bution, and past construction practices. These ideas are presented here
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
99
Substation
Recloser
New
Recloser
New
Recloser
Add Tie Line
Close Tie
(No Fast Tripping)
Highly Reliable
Line Segment 
Figure 3.42
Reconfiguring a feeder with parallel subfeeders to reduce the average num-
ber of interruptions to all customers.
Substation
Breaker
Main Feeder
(Highly Reliable)
(No Direct Loads)
Reclosers
(with
Fast Tripping)
Subfeeders
(No Fast Tripping)
Fused Taps
Figure 3.43
Designing a feeder with multiple three-phase subfeeds off a highly reliable
main feeder.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

simply as alternatives to consider for achieving overall lower average
interruption rates than is possible by stacking fault interrupters in
series. Although these practices may not become widespread, they may
be very useful for dealing with specific difficult power quality com-
plaint problems stemming from excessive interruptions.
3.7.8
Midline or tap reclosers
Despite responding to complaints by removing fast tripping, about 40
percent of the utilities surveyed indicated they were interested in
adding more line reclosers to improve customers’ perceptions of power
quality. This would accomplish greater sectionalizing of the feeder and,
perhaps, permit the use of fuse-saving practices on the bulk of the
feeder again. This practice is very effective if the whole feeder is being
interrupted for faults that are largely constrained to a particular
region. By putting the recloser farther out on the feeder, it will attempt
to clear the fault first so that the number of customers inconvenienced
by a blink is reduced. If it is also necessary to eliminate fast tripping on
the substation breaker, only a smaller portion of the feeder nearer the
substation is threatened with the possibility of having a fuse blow on a
transient fault, as explained previously. This is not much different than
the normal case because of the difficulty in preventing fuse blowing in
the high fault current regions near the substation anyway.
A few utilities have actually done the opposite to this and removed
line reclosers in response to complaints about momentary interrup-
tions. Perhaps, a section of the feeder ran through heavily wooded areas
causing frequent operations of the recloser, or the device was respond-
ing to high ground currents due to harmonics or a load imbalance, caus-
ing false trips. Whatever the reason, this is an unusual practice and is
counter to the direction most utilities seem to be taking. The main ques-
tion at this point does not seem to be about whether more line reclosers
are needed but about how to go about applying them to achieve the dual
goal of increased power quality and reliability of service.
3.7.9
Instantaneous reclosing
Instantaneous reclosing is the practice of reclosing within 12 to 30
cycles after interrupting the fault, generally only on the first operation.
This has been a standard feature of breakers and reclosers for some
time, and some utilities use it as standard practice, particularly on sub-
station breakers. However, the practice has never been universally
accepted. Many utilities reclose no faster than 2 s (the standard reclos-
ing interval on a hydraulic recloser) and some wait even longer.
After it was observed that many digital clocks and even some motor-
driven loads can successfully ride through a 12- to 30-cycle interrup-
100
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tion, some utilities began to experiment with using instantaneous
reclosing while retaining the fast tripping to save fuses. One utility try-
ing this on 12-kV feeders reported that there was no significant
increase in the number of breaker and recloser operations and that the
number of complaints had diminished.11 Therefore, it is something that
other utilities might consider, with the caution that the same experi-
ence may not be achieved at higher voltage levels and with certain line
designs.
Instantaneous reclosing has had a bad reputation with some utility
engineers. One risk is that there is insufficient time for the arc prod-
ucts to disperse and the fault will not clear. Some utilities have had this
experience with higher distribution voltage levels and particular line
constructions. When this happens, substation transformers are sub-
jected to repeated through-faults unnecessarily. This could result in
increased failures of the transformers. However, if there is no indica-
tion that instantaneous reclosing is causing increased breaker opera-
tions, it should be safe to use it.
Another concern is that very high torques will be generated in rotat-
ing machines upon reclosing. This is a particular issue with distributed
generation because 12 to 30 cycles may not be sufficient time to guar-
antee that the generator’s protective relaying will detect a problem on
the utility side and be off-line (see Chap. 9). Reclosing intervals on feed-
ers with DG should be at least 1 to 2 s so that there is less chance the
utility will reclose into the DG out of synchronism. Some utilities allow
5 s. One way the utility can help prevent such an occurrence is to use a
common recloser accessory that blocks reclosing when there is voltage
present on the load side. This may add significant cost if suitable poten-
tial transformers are not already installed.
3.7.10
Single-phase tripping
Most of the three-phase breakers and reclosers on the utility distribu-
tion system operate all three phases simultaneously. One approach
that has been suggested to minimize the exposure of customers to
momentary outages is to trip only the faulted phase or phases. Because
many of the loads are single phase, this would automatically reduce the
exposure by two-thirds for most faults. The main problem with this is
that it is possible to damage some three-phase loads if they are single-
phased for a substantial length of time. Thus, it is generally considered
to be undesirable to use single-phase reclosers on three-phase branches
with significant three-phase loads. Of course, this is done quite com-
monly when only one-phase loads are being served.
This problem is solved by a three-phase breaker, or recloser, that is
capable of operating each phase independently until it is determined
that the fault is permanent. Then, to prevent single-phasing of three-
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
101
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

phase loads, all three phases are opened if the fault is permanent and
the interrupter locks out. Such devices are available from distribution
equipment suppliers (see Fig. 3.37).
3.7.11
Current-limiting fuses
Current-limiting fuses are often used in electrical equipment where the
fault current is very high and an internal fault could result in a cata-
strophic failure. Since they are more expensive than conventional
expulsion links, their application is generally limited to locations
where the fault current is in excess of 2000 to 3000 A. Figure 3.44
shows examples of current-limiting fuses. There are various designs,
but the basic configuration is that of a thin ribbon element or wire
wound around a form and encased in a sealed insulating tube filled
with a special sand. The tube is constructed of stout material such as a
fiberglass-epoxy resin composite to withstand the pressures during the
102
Chapter Three
Figure 3.44
Various types of current-limiting fuses used in
utility applications. (Courtesy of Cooper Power Systems.)
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

interruption process without rupturing. The element melts in many
places simultaneously and, with the aid of the melting sand, very
quickly builds up a voltage drop that opposes the flow of current. The
current is forced to zero in about one-fourth of a cycle.
The main purpose of current-limiting fuses is to prevent damage due
to excessive fault current. They have the beneficial side effect with
respect to power quality that the voltage sag resulting from the fault is
very brief. Figure 3.45 shows typical voltage and current waveforms
from a current-limiting fuse operation during a single-line-to-ground
fault. The voltage drops immediately to about 40 percent because of the
fault, but shortly recovers and overshoots to about 140 percent as the
peak arc voltage develops in the fuse to cut off current flow. Note that
the current waveform is clipped by the instrumentation. The voltage
sag is so short that not many industrial processes will be adversely
affected. Therefore, one proposed practice is to install current-limiting
fuses on each lateral branch in the high fault current region near the
substation to reduce the number of sags that affect industrial
processes.
When current-limiting fuses were first installed on utility systems in
great numbers, there was the fear that the peak arc voltage transient,
which exceeds system voltage, would cause damage to arresters and to
insulation in the system. This has not proven to be a significant prob-
lem. The overvoltage is on the same order as capacitor-switching tran-
sient overvoltages, which occur several times a day on most utility
systems without serious consequences.
3.7.12
Adaptive relaying
Adaptive relaying is the practice of changing the relaying characteris-
tics of the overcurrent protective device to suit the present system con-
ditions.
One relevant thing that is currently being done with adaptive relay-
ing is the enabling and disabling of fast tripping of breakers in
response to weather conditions. This is generally done through a radio
or telecommunications link to the utility control center. It could also be
done with local devices that have the ability to detect the presence of
nearby lightning or rain. If a storm is approaching, fast tripping is
enabled to save the fuses from the anticipated high incidence of tem-
porary faults. End users are more understanding and less likely to
complain about interruptions during storms.
At other times, fast tripping is disabled and the fuses are allowed to
blow. This does not mean there will be no temporary faults without
storms. Animals can climb electrical structures at any time and cause
a fault. Vegetation growth may be sufficient to cause faults. However,
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
103
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the public is generally much less understanding about an interruption
on a clear day.
3.7.13
Ignoring third-harmonic currents
The level of third-harmonic currents has been increasing due to the
increase in the numbers of computers and other types of electronic
loads on the system. The residual current (sum of the three-phase cur-
rents) on many feeders contains as much third harmonic as it does fun-
damental frequency. A common case is to find each of the phase
currents to be moderately distorted with a THD of 7 to 8 percent, con-
sisting primarily of the third harmonic. The third-harmonic currents
sum directly in the neutral so that the third harmonic is 20 to 25 per-
cent of the phase current, which is often as large, or larger, than the
fundamental frequency current in the neutral (see Chaps. 5 and 6).
104
Chapter Three
–30
–20
–10
Phase A Voltage
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
Phase A Current
0
20
40
60
80
100
–60
–40
–20
0
20
40
A
Time, ms
kV
Time, ms
Figure 3.45
Typical current-limiting fuse operation show-
ing brief sag followed by peak arc voltage when the fuse
clears.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Because the third-harmonic current is predominantly zero-sequence, it
affects the ground-fault relaying. There have been incidents where there
have been false trips and lockout due to excessive harmonic currents in
the ground-relaying circuit. At least one of the events we have investi-
gated has been correlated with capacitor switching where it is suspected
that the third-harmonic current was amplified somewhat due to reso-
nance. There may be many more events that we have not heard about,
and it is expected that the problem will only get worse in the future.
The simplest solution is to raise the ground-fault pickup level when
operating procedures will allow. Unfortunately, this makes fault detec-
tion less sensitive, which defeats the purpose of having ground relay-
ing, and some utilities are restrained by standards from raising the
ground trip level. It has been observed that if the third harmonic could
be filtered out, it might be possible to set the ground relaying to be more
sensitive. The third-harmonic current is almost entirely a function of
load and is not a component of fault current. When a fault occurs, the
current seen by the relaying is predominantly sinusoidal. Therefore, it
is not necessary for the relaying to be able to monitor the third har-
monic for fault detection.
The first relays were electromagnetic devices that basically
responded to the effective (rms) value of the current. Thus, for years, it
has been common practice to design electronic relays to duplicate that
response and digital relays have also generally included the significant
lower harmonics. In retrospect, it would have been better if the third
harmonic would have been ignored for ground-fault relays.
There is still a valid reason for monitoring the third harmonic in
phase relaying because phase relaying is used to detect overload as
well as faults. Overload evaluation is generally an rms function.
3.7.14
Utility fault prevention
One sure way to eliminate complaints about utility fault-clearing oper-
ations is to eliminate faults altogether. Of course, there will always be
some faults, but there are many things that can be done to dramatically
reduce the incidence of faults.18
Overhead line maintenance
Tree trimming. This is one of the more effective methods of reducing
the number of faults on overhead lines. It is a necessity, although the
public may complain about the environmental and aesthetic impact.
Insulator washing. Like tree trimming in wooded regions, insulator
washing is necessary in coastal and dusty regions. Otherwise, there
will be numerous insulator flashovers for even a mild rainstorm with-
out lightning.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
105
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Shield wires. Shield wires for lightning are common for utility trans-
mission systems. They are generally not applied on distribution feed-
ers except where lines have an unusually high incidence of lightning
strikes. Some utilities construct their feeders with the neutral on top,
perhaps even extending the pole, to provide shielding. No shielding is
perfect.
Improving pole grounds. Several utilities have reported doing this to
improve the power quality with respect to faults. However, we are not
certain of all the reasons for doing this. Perhaps, it makes the faults
easier to detect. If shielding is employed, this will reduce the back-
flashover rate. If not, it would not seem that this would provide any
benefit with respect to lightning unless combined with line arrester
applications (see Line Arresters below).
Modified conductor spacing. Employing a different line spacing can
sometimes increase the withstand to flashover or the susceptibility to
getting trees in the line.
Tree wire (insulated/covered conductor). In areas where tree trimming is
not practical, insulated or covered conductor can reduce the likelihood
of tree-induced faults.
UD cables.
Fault prevention techniques in underground distribution
(UD) cables are generally related to preserving the insulation against
voltage surges. The insulation degrades significantly as it ages, requir-
ing increasing efforts to keep the cable sound. This generally involves
arrester protection schemes to divert lightning surges coming from the
overhead system, although there are some efforts to restore insulation
levels through injecting fluids into the cable.
Since nearly all cable faults are permanent, the power quality issue
is more one of finding the fault location quickly so that the cable can be
manually sectionalized and repaired. Fault location devices available
for that purpose are addressed in Sec. 3.7.15.
Line arresters.
To prevent overhead line faults, one must either raise
the insulation level of the line, prevent lightning from striking the line,
or prevent the voltage from exceeding the insulation level. The third
idea is becoming more popular with improving surge arrester designs.
To accomplish this, surge arresters are placed every two or three poles
along the feeder as well as on distribution transformers. Some utilities
place them on all three phases, while other utilities place them only on
the phase most likely to be struck by lightning. To support some of the
recent ideas about improving power quality, or providing custom power
with superreliable main feeders, it will be necessary to put arresters on
every phase of every pole.
106
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Presently, applying line arresters in addition to the normal arrester
at transformer locations is done only on line sections with a history of
numerous lightning-induced faults. But recently, some utilities have
claimed that applying line arresters is not only more effective than
shielding, but it is more economical.14
Some sections of urban and suburban feeders will naturally
approach the goal of an arrester every two or three poles because the
density of load requires the installation of a distribution transformer at
least that frequently. Each transformer will normally have a primary
arrester in lightning-prone regions.
3.7.15
Fault locating
Finding faults quickly is an important aspect of reliability and the
quality of power.
Faulted circuit indicators.
Finding cable faults is often quite a chal-
lenge. The cables are underground, and it is generally impossible to see
the fault, although occasionally there will be a physical display. To
expedite locating the fault, many utilities use “faulted circuit indica-
tors,” or simply “fault indicators,” to locate the faulted section more
quickly. These are devices that flip a target indicator when the current
exceeds a particular level. The idea is to put one at each pad-mount
transformer; the last one showing a target will be located just before
the faulted section.
There are two main schools of thought on the selection of ratings of
faulted circuit indicators. The more traditional school says to choose a
rating that is 2 to 3 times the maximum expected load on the cable.
This results in a fairly sensitive fault detection capability.
The opposing school says that this is too sensitive and is the reason
that many fault indicators give a false indication. A false indication
delays the location of the fault and contributes to degraded reliability
and power quality. The reason given for the false indication is that the
energy stored in the cable generates sufficient current to trip the indi-
cator when the fault occurs. Thus, a few indicators downline from the
fault may also show the fault. The solution to this problem is to apply
the indicator with a rating based on the maximum fault current avail-
able rather than on the maximum load current. This is based on the
assumption that most cable faults quickly develop into bolted faults.
Therefore, the rating is selected allowing for a margin of 10 to 20 per-
cent.
Another issue impacting the use of fault indicators is DG. With mul-
tiple sources on the feeder capable of supplying fault current, there will
be an increase in false indications. In some cases, it is likely that all the
fault indicators between the generator locations and the fault will be
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
107
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tripped. It will be a challenge to find new technologies that work ade-
quately in this environment. This is just one example of the subtle
impacts on utility practice resulting from sufficient DG penetration to
significantly alter fault currents.
Fault indicators must be reset before the next fault event. Some
must be reset manually, while others have one of a number of tech-
niques for detecting, or assuming, the restoration of power and reset-
ting automatically. Some of the techniques include test point reset,
low-voltage reset, current reset, electrostatic reset, and time reset.
Locating cable faults without fault indicators.
Without fault indicators,
the utility must rely on more manual techniques for finding the loca-
tion of a fault. There are a large number of different types of fault-locat-
ing techniques and a detailed description of each is beyond the scope of
this report. Some of the general classes of methods follow.
Thumping. This is a common practice with numerous minor varia-
tions. The basic technique is to place a dc voltage on the cable that is
sufficient to cause the fault to be reestablished and then try to detect
by sight, sound, or feel the physical display from the fault. One common
way to do this is with a capacitor bank that can store enough energy to
generate a sufficiently loud noise. Those standing on the ground on top
of the fault can feel and hear the “thump” from the discharge. Some
combine this with cable radar techniques to confirm estimates of dis-
tance. Many are concerned with the potential damage to the sound por-
tion of the cable due to thumping techniques.
Cable radar and other pulse methods. These techniques make use of trav-
eling-wave theory to produce estimates of the distance to the fault. The
wave velocity on the cable is known. Therefore, if an impulse is injected
into the cable, the time for the reflection to return will be proportional
to the length of the cable to the fault. An open circuit will reflect the
voltage wave back positively while a short circuit will reflect it back
negatively. The impulse current will do the opposite. If the routing of
the cable is known, the fault location can be found simply by measur-
ing along the route. It can be confirmed and fine-tuned by thumping
the cable. On some systems, there are several taps off the cable. The
distance to the fault is only part of the story; one has to determine
which branch it is on. This can be a very difficult problem that is still a
major obstacle to rapidly locating a cable fault.
Tone. A tone system injects a high-frequency signal on the cable, and
the route of the cable can be followed by a special receiver. This tech-
nique is sometimes used to trace the cable route while it is energized,
but is also useful for fault location because the tone will disappear
beyond the fault location.
108
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Fault chasing with a fuse. The cable is manually sectionalized, and then
each section is reenergized until a fuse blows. The faulted section is
determined by the process of elimination or by observing the physical
display from the fault. Because of the element of danger and the possi-
bility of damaging cable components, some utilities strongly discourage
this practice. Others require the use of small current-limiting fuses,
which minimize the amount of energy permitted into the fault. This
can be an expensive and time-consuming procedure that some consider
to be the least effective of fault-locating methods and one that should
be used only as a last resort. This also subjects end users to nuisance
voltage sags.
3.8
References
1. J. Lamoree, J. C. Smith, P. Vinett, T. Duffy, M. Klein, “The Impact of Voltage Sags on
Industrial Plant Loads,” First International Conference on Power Quality, PQA ’91,
Paris, France.
2. P. Vinett, R. Temple, J. Lamoree, C. De Winkel, E. Kostecki, “Application of a
Superconducting Magnetic Energy Storage Device to Improve Facility Power
Quality,” Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Power Quality: End-
use Applications and Perspectives, PQA ’92, Atlanta, GA, September 1992.
3. G. Beam, E. G Dolack, C. J. Melhorn, V. Misiewicz, M. Samotyj, “Power Quality Case
Studies, Voltage Sags: The Impact on the Utility and Industrial Customers,” Third
International Conference on Power Quality, PQA ’93, San Diego, CA, November 1993.
4. J. Lamoree, D. Mueller, P. Vinett, W. Jones, “Voltage Sag Analysis Case Studies,”
1993 IEEE I&CPS Conference, St. Petersburg, FL.
5. M. F. McGranaghan, D. R. Mueller, M. J. Samotyj, “Voltage Sags in Industrial
Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 29, no. 2, March/April
1993.
6. Le Tang, J. Lamoree, M. McGranaghan, H. Mehta, “Distribution System Voltage
Sags: Interaction with Motor and Drive Loads,” IEEE Transmission and Distribution
Conference, Chicago, IL, April 10–15, 1994, pp. 1–6.
7. EPRI RP 3098-1, An Assessment of Distribution Power Quality, Electric Power
Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA.
8. IEEE Standard Guide for Electric Power Distribution Reliability Indices, IEEE
Standard 1366-2001.
9. James J. Burke, Power Distribution Engineering: Fundamentals and Applications,
Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1994.
10. C. M. Warren, “The Effect of Reducing Momentary Outages on Distribution
Reliability Indices,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, July 1993, pp. 1610–1617.
11. R. C. Dugan, L. A. Ray, D. D. Sabin, et al., “Impact of Fast Tripping of Utility
Breakers on Industrial Load Interruptions,” Conference Record of the 1994
IEEE/IAS Annual Meeting, Vol. III, Denver, October 1994, pp. 2326–2333.
12. T. Roughan, P. Freeman, “Power Quality and the Electric Utility, Reducing the
Impact of Feeder Faults on Customers,” Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Power Quality: End-use Applications and Perspectives (PQA ’92),
EPRI, Atlanta, GA, September 28–30, 1992.
13. J. Lamoree, Le Tang, C. De Winkel, P. Vinett, “Description of a Micro-SMES System
for Protection of Critical Customer Facilities,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery,
April 1994, pp. 984–991.
14. Randall A. Stansberry, “Protecting Distribution Circuits: Overhead Shield Wire
Versus Lightning Surge Arresters,” Transmission & Distribution, April 1991, pp.
56ff.
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
109
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

15. S. Santoso, R. Zavadil, D. Folts, M.F McGranaghan, T. E Grebe, “Modeling and
Analysis of a 1.7 MVA SMES-based Sag Protector,” Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Power System Transients Conference, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, June 24–28, 2001, pp. 115–119.
16. Math H. J. Bollen, Understanding Power Quality Problems, Voltage Sags and
Interruptions, IEEE Press Series on Power Engineering, The Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers, Inc., New York, 2000.
17. SEMI Standard F-47, Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International, 1999.
18. IEEE Standard 1346-1998, Recommended Practice for Evaluating Electric Power
System Compatibility with Electronic Process Equipment.
110
Chapter Three
Voltage Sags and Interruptions
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

111
Transient Overvoltages
4.1
Sources of Transient Overvoltages
There are two main sources of transient overvoltages on utility sys-
tems: capacitor switching and lightning. These are also sources of tran-
sient overvoltages as well as a myriad of other switching phenomena
within end-user facilities. Some power electronic devices generate sig-
nificant transients when they switch. As described in Chap. 2, tran-
sient overvoltages can be generated at high frequency (load switching
and lightning), medium frequency (capacitor energizing), or low fre-
quency.
4.1.1
Capacitor switching
Capacitor switching is one of the most common switching events on
utility systems. Capacitors are used to provide reactive power (in units
of vars) to correct the power factor, which reduces losses and supports
the voltage on the system. They are a very economical and generally
trouble-free means of accomplishing these goals. Alternative methods
such as the use of rotating machines and electronic var compensators
are much more costly or have high maintenance costs. Thus, the use of
capacitors on power systems is quite common and will continue to be.
One drawback to the use of capacitors is that they yield oscillatory
transients when switched. Some capacitors are energized all the time
(a fixed bank), while others are switched according to load levels.
Various control means, including time, temperature, voltage, current,
and reactive power, are used to determine when the capacitors are
switched. It is common for controls to combine two or more of these
functions, such as temperature with voltage override.
Chapter4
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

One of the common symptoms of power quality problems related to
utility capacitor switching overvoltages is that the problems appear at
nearly the same time each day. On distribution feeders with industrial
loads, capacitors are frequently switched by time clock in anticipation
of an increase in load with the beginning of the working day. Common
problems are adjustable-speed-drive trips and malfunctions of other
electronically controlled load equipment that occur without a notice-
able blinking of the lights or impact on other, more conventional loads.
Figure 4.1 shows the one-line diagram of a typical utility feeder
capacitor-switching situation. When the switch is closed, a transient
similar to the one in Fig. 4.2 may be observed upline from the capaci-
tor at the monitor location. In this particular case, the capacitor switch
contacts close at a point near the system voltage peak. This is a com-
mon occurrence for many types of switches because the insulation
across the switch contacts tends to break down when the voltage across
the switch is at a maximum value. The voltage across the capacitor at
this instant is zero. Since the capacitor voltage cannot change instan-
taneously, the system voltage at the capacitor location is briefly pulled
down to zero and rises as the capacitor begins to charge toward the sys-
tem voltage. Because the power system source is inductive, the capaci-
tor voltage overshoots and rings at the natural frequency of the system.
At the monitoring location shown, the initial change in voltage will not
go completely to zero because of the impedance between the observa-
tion point and the switched capacitor. However, the initial drop and
subsequent ringing transient that is indicative of a capacitor-switching
event will be observable to some degree.
The overshoot will generate a transient between 1.0 and 2.0 pu
depending on system damping. In this case the transient observed at
the monitoring location is about 1.34 pu. Utility capacitor-switching
transients are commonly in the 1.3- to 1.4-pu range but have also been
observed near the theoretical maximum.
The transient shown in the oscillogram propagates into the local
power system and will generally pass through distribution transform-
ers into customer load facilities by nearly the amount related to the
turns ratio of the transformer. If there are capacitors on the secondary
system, the voltage may actually be magnified on the load side of the
transformer if the natural frequencies of the systems are properly
aligned (see Sec. 4.1.2). While such brief transients up to 2.0 pu are not
generally damaging to the system insulation, they can often cause
misoperation of electronic power conversion devices. Controllers may
interpret the high voltage as a sign that there is an impending danger-
ous situation and subsequently disconnect the load to be safe. The tran-
sient may also interfere with the gating of thyristors.
112
Chapter Four
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Switching of grounded-wye transformer banks may also result in
unusual transient voltages in the local grounding system due to the
current surge that accompanies the energization. Figure 4.3 shows the
phase current observed for the capacitor-switching incident described
in the preceding text. The transient current flowing in the feeder peaks
at nearly 4 times the load current.
Transient Overvoltages
113
y
FEEDER IMPEDANCE
MONITOR
LOCATION
SUBSTATION
SWITCHED
CAPACITOR
Figure 4.1
One-line diagram of a capacitor-switching operation corre-
sponding to the waveform in Fig. 4.2.
Phase A Voltage
Wave Fault
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
Time (ms)
% Volts
Figure 4.2
Typical utility capacitor-switching transient reaching
134 percent voltage, observed upline from the capacitor.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

4.1.2
Magnification of capacitor-switching
transients
A potential side effect of adding power factor correction capacitors at
the customer location is that they may increase the impact of utility
capacitor-switching transients on end-use equipment. As shown in Sec.
4.1.1, there is always a brief voltage transient of at least 1.3 to 1.4 pu
when capacitor banks are switched. The transient is generally no
higher than 2.0 pu on the primary distribution system, although
ungrounded capacitor banks may yield somewhat higher values. Load-
side capacitors can magnify this transient overvoltage at the end-user
bus for certain low-voltage capacitor and step-down transformer sizes.
The circuit of concern for this phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 4.4.
Transient overvoltages on the end-user side may reach as high as 3.0
to 4.0 pu on the low-voltage bus under these conditions, with poten-
tially damaging consequences for all types of customer equipment.
Magnification of utility capacitor-switching transients at the end-
user location occurs over a wide range of transformer and capacitor
sizes. Resizing the customer’s power factor correction capacitors or
step-down transformer is therefore usually not a practical solution.
One solution is to control the transient overvoltage at the utility capac-
114
Chapter Four
Phase A Current
Wave Fault
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
–400
–300
–200
–100
0
100
200
300
400
Time (ms)
Amps
Figure 4.3
Feeder current associated with capacitor-switching event.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

itor. This is sometimes possible using synchronous closing breakers or
switches with preinsertion resistors. These solutions are discussed in
more detail in Sec. 4.4.2.
At the customer location, high-energy surge arresters can be applied
to limit the transient voltage magnitude at the customer bus. Energy
levels associated with the magnified transient will typically be about 1
kJ. Figure 4.5 shows the expected arrester energy for a range of low-
voltage capacitor sizes. Newer high-energy MOV arresters for low-volt-
age applications can withstand 2 to 4 kJ.
It is important to note that the arresters can only limit the transient
to the arrester protective level. This will typically be approximately 
Transient Overvoltages
115
(a)  Voltage magnification at customer capacitor due to
energizing capacitor on utility system
(b)  Equivalent circuit
f1
L1C1
f2
L2C2
1
2
1
2
=
=
π
π
Switching frequency
Natural frequency of
customer resonant circuit
Voltage magnification
f1
f2
⇔
≈
V
V C2
L1
L2
C2
C1
Load
Feeder
Source
Substation
Service
Transformer
C1
C2
L2
L1
C1
Figure 4.4
Voltage magnification of capacitor bank switching.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

1.8 times the normal peak voltage (1.8 pu). This may not be sufficient
to protect sensitive electronic equipment that might only have a with-
stand capability of 1.75 pu [1200-V peak inverse voltage (PIV) rating of
many silicon-controlled rectifiers (SCRs) used in the industrial envi-
ronment]. It may not be possible to improve the protective characteris-
tics of the arresters substantially because these characteristics are
limited by the physics of the metal-oxide materials. Therefore, for
proper coordination, it is important to carefully evaluate the withstand
capabilities of sensitive equipment used in applications where these
transients can occur.
Another means of limiting the voltage magnification transient is to
convert the end-user power factor correction banks to harmonic filters.
An inductance in series with the power factor correction bank will
decrease the transient voltage at the customer bus to acceptable levels.
This solution has multiple benefits including providing correction for
the displacement power factor, controlling harmonic distortion levels
within the facility, and limiting the concern for magnified capacitor-
switching transients.
In many cases, there are only a small number of load devices, such
as adjustable-speed motor drives, that are adversely affected by the
transient. It is frequently more economical to place line reactors in
series with the drives to block the high-frequency magnification tran-
sient. A 3 percent reactor is generally effective. While offering only a
small impedance to power frequency current, it offers a considerably
larger impedance to the transient. Many types of drives have this pro-
tection inherently, either through an isolation transformer or a dc bus
reactance.
116
Chapter Four
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Energy (J)
Low-Voltage Capacitor Size (kVAR)
6.0 MVAR
4.5 MVAR
3.0 MVAR
2.4 MVAR
1.8 MVAR
Switched Cap Size
Step-Down Transformer = 1500 kVA
1.2 MVAR
Figure 4.5
Arrester energy duty caused by magnified transient.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

4.1.3
Lightning
Lightning is a potent source of impulsive transients. We will not devote
space to the physical phenomena here because that topic is well docu-
mented in other reference books.1–3 We will concentrate on how light-
ning causes transient overvoltages to appear on power systems.
Figure 4.6 illustrates some of the places where lightning can strike
that results in lightning currents being conducted from the power sys-
tem into loads.
The most obvious conduction path occurs during a direct strike to a
phase wire, either on the primary or the secondary side of the trans-
former. This can generate very high overvoltages, but some analysts
question whether this is the most common way that lightning surges
enter load facilities and cause damage. Very similar transient over-
voltages can be generated by lightning currents flowing along ground
conductor paths. Note that there can be numerous paths for lightning
currents to enter the grounding system. Common ones, indicated by
the dotted lines in Fig. 4.6, include the primary ground, the secondary
ground, and the structure of the load facilities. Note also that strikes to
the primary phase are conducted to the ground circuits through the
arresters on the service transformer. Thus, many more lightning
impulses may be observed at loads than one might think.
Keep in mind that grounds are never perfect conductors, especially
for impulses. While most of the surge current may eventually be dissi-
pated into the ground connection closest to the strike, there will be sub-
stantial surge currents flowing in other connected ground conductors
in the first few microseconds of the strike.
Transient Overvoltages
117
Figure 4.6
Lightning strike locations where lightning impulses will be con-
ducted into load facilities.
PRIMARY
PHASE
SECONDARY
PHASE
PRIMARY
GROUND
GROUNDED
STRUCTURE
SECONDARY GROUND
ARRESTER
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

A direct strike to a phase conductor generally causes line flashover
near the strike point. Not only does this generate an impulsive tran-
sient, but it causes a fault with the accompanying voltage sags and
interruptions. The lightning surge can be conducted a considerable dis-
tance along utility lines and cause multiple flashovers at pole and
tower structures as it passes. The interception of the impulse from the
phase wire is fairly straightforward if properly installed surge
arresters are used. If the line flashes over at the location of the strike,
the tail of the impulse is generally truncated. Depending on the effec-
tiveness of the grounds along the surge current path, some of the cur-
rent may find its way into load apparatus. Arresters near the strike
may not survive because of the severe duty (most lightning strokes are
actually many strokes in rapid-fire sequence).
Lightning does not have to actually strike a conductor to inject
impulses into the power system. Lightning may simply strike near the
line and induce an impulse by the collapse of the electric field.
Lightning may also simply strike the ground near a facility causing the
local ground reference to rise considerably. This may force currents
along grounded conductors into a remote ground, possibly passing near
sensitive load apparatus.
Many investigators in this field postulate that lightning surges enter
loads from the utility system through the interwinding capacitance of
the service transformer as shown in Fig. 4.7. The concept is that the
lightning impulse is so fast that the inductance of the transformer
windings blocks the first part of the wave from passing through by the
turns ratio. However, the interwinding capacitance may offer a ready
path for the high-frequency surge. This can permit the existence of a
voltage on the secondary terminals that is much higher than what the
turns ratio of the windings would suggest.
The degree to which capacitive coupling occurs is greatly dependent
on the design of the transformer. Not all transformers have a straight-
forward high-to-low capacitance because of the way the windings are
constructed. The winding-to-ground capacitance may be greater than
the winding-to-winding capacitance, and more of the impulse may
actually be coupled to ground than to the secondary winding. In any
case, the resulting transient is a very short single impulse, or train of
impulses, because the interwinding capacitance charges quickly.
Arresters on the secondary winding should have no difficulty dissipat-
ing the energy in such a surge, but the rates of rise can be high. Thus,
lead length becomes very important to the success of an arrester in
keeping this impulse out of load equipment.
Many times, a longer impulse, which is sometimes oscillatory, is
observed on the secondary when there is a strike to a utility’s primary
118
Chapter Four
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

distribution system. This is likely due not to capacitive coupling
through the service transformer but to conduction around the trans-
former through the grounding systems as shown in Fig. 4.8. This is a
particular problem if the load system offers a better ground and much
of the surge current flows through conductors in the load facility on its
way to ground.
The chief power quality problems with lightning stroke currents
entering the ground system are
1. They raise the potential of the local ground above other grounds in
the vicinity by several kilovolts. Sensitive electronic equipment that
is connected between two ground references, such as a computer
connected to the telephone system through a modem, can fail when
subjected to the lightning surge voltages.
2. They induce high voltages in phase conductors as they pass through
cables on the way to a better ground.
The problems are related to the so-called low-side surge problem that
is described in Sec. 4.5.3.
Ideas about lightning are changing with recent research.10 Lightning
causes more flashovers of utility lines than previously thought.
Evidence is also mounting that lightning stroke current wavefronts are
faster than previously thought and that multiple strikes appear to be
the norm rather than the exception. Durations of some strokes may
also be longer than reported by earlier researchers. These findings may
help explain failures of lightning arresters that were thought to have
adequate capacity to handle large lightning strokes.
Transient Overvoltages
119
Figure 4.7
Coupling of impulses through the interwinding
capacitance of transformers.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

4.1.4
Ferroresonance
The term ferroresonance refers to a special kind of resonance that
involves capacitance and iron-core inductance. The most common con-
dition in which it causes disturbances is when the magnetizing imped-
ance of a transformer is placed in series with a system capacitor. This
happens when there is an open-phase conductor. Under controlled con-
ditions, ferroresonance can be exploited for useful purpose such as in a
constant-voltage transformer (see Chap. 3).
Ferroresonance is different than resonance in linear system ele-
ments. In linear systems, resonance results in high sinusoidal voltages
and currents of the resonant frequency. Linear-system resonance is the
phenomenon behind the magnification of harmonics in power systems
(see Chaps. 5 and 6). Ferroresonance can also result in high voltages
and currents, but the resulting waveforms are usually irregular and
chaotic in shape. The concept of ferroresonance can be explained in
terms of linear-system resonance as follows.
Consider a simple series RLC circuit as shown in Fig. 4.9. Neglecting
the resistance R for the moment, the current flowing in the circuit can
be expressed as follows:
I 
where E  driving voltage
XL  reactance of L
XC  reactance of C
When XL  |XC|, a series-resonant circuit is formed, and the equation
yields an infinitely large current that in reality would be limited by R.
An alternate solution to the series RLC circuit can be obtained by
writing two equations defining the voltage across the inductor, i.e.,
E

j (XL  |XC|)
120
Chapter Four
TRANSFORMER
GROUND
OTHER GROUND
PRIMARY
ARRESTER
Figure 4.8
Lightning impulse bypassing the service
transformer through ground connections.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

v  jXLI
v  E  j|XC|I
where v is a voltage variable. Figure 4.10 shows the graphical solution
of these two equations for two different reactances, XL and XL′. XL′ rep-
resents the series-resonant condition. The intersection point between
the capacitive and inductive lines gives the voltage across inductor EL.
The voltage across capacitor EC is determined as shown in Fig. 4.10. At
resonance, the two lines will intersect at infinitely large voltage and
current since the |XC| line is parallel to the XL′ line.
Now, let us assume that the inductive element in the circuit has a
nonlinear reactance characteristic like that found in transformer mag-
netizing reactance. Figure 4.11 illustrates the graphical solution of the
equations following the methodology just presented for linear circuits.
While the analogy cannot be made perfectly, the diagram is useful to
help understand ferroresonance phenomena.
It is obvious that there may be as many as three intersections
between the capacitive reactance line and the inductive reactance
curve. Intersection 2 is an unstable solution, and this operating point
gives rise to some of the chaotic behavior of ferroresonance.
Intersections 1 and 3 are stable and will exist in the steady state.
Intersection 3 results in high voltages and high currents.
Figures 4.12 and 4.13 show examples of ferroresonant voltages that
can result from this simple series circuit. The same inductive charac-
teristic was assumed for each case. The capacitance was varied to
achieve a different operating point after an initial transient that
pushes the system into resonance. The unstable case yields voltages in
excess of 4.0 pu, while the stable case settles in at voltages slightly over
2.0 pu. Either condition can impose excessive duty on power system ele-
ments and load equipment.
For a small capacitance, the |XC| line is very steep, resulting in an
intersection point on the third quadrant only. This can yield a range of
voltages from less than 1.0 pu to voltages like those shown in Fig. 4.13.
Transient Overvoltages
121
XL
XC
R
E
I
Figure 4.9
Simple series RLC circuit.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

122
Chapter Four
XL
X'L
EL
E
XC
v
jI
E
EC
EL
Figure 4.10
Graphical solution to the linear LC circuit.
XC
XL
v
jI
increasing
capacitance
EL
E
2
1
3
jIjI
EL
EC
E
Figure 4.11
Graphical solution to the nonlinear LC circuit.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

When C is very large, the capacitive reactance line will intersect only
at points 1 and 3. One operating state is of low voltage and lagging cur-
rent (intersection 1), and the other is of high voltage and leading cur-
rent (intersection 3). The operating points during ferroresonance can
oscillate between intersection points 1 and 3 depending on the applied
voltage. Often, the resistance in the circuit prevents operation at point
3 and no high voltages will occur.
In practice, ferroresonance most commonly occurs when unloaded
transformers become isolated on underground cables of a certain range
Transient Overvoltages
123
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
V, per unit
Figure 4.12
Example of unstable, chaotic ferroresonance voltages.
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
V, per unit
Figure 4.13
Example of ferroresonance voltages settling into a stable operating point
(intersection 3) after an initial transient.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

of lengths. The capacitance of overhead distribution lines is generally
insufficient to yield the appropriate conditions.
The minimum length of cable required to cause ferroresonance
varies with the system voltage level. The capacitance of cables is
nearly the same for all distribution voltage levels, varying from 40 to
100 nF per 1000 feet (ft), depending on conductor size. However, the
magnetizing reactance of a 35-kV-class distribution transformer is
several times higher (the curve is steeper) than a comparably sized
15-kV-class transformer. Therefore, damaging ferroresonance has
been more common at the higher voltages. For delta-connected trans-
formers, ferroresonance can occur for less than 100 ft of cable. For
this reason, many utilities avoid this connection on cable-fed trans-
formers. The grounded wye-wye transformer has become the most
commonly used connection in underground systems in North
American. It is more resistant, but not immune, to ferroresonance
because most units use a three-legged or five-legged core design that
couples the phases magnetically. It may require a minimum of several
hundred feet of cable to provide enough capacitance to create a fer-
roresonant condition for this connection.
The most common events leading to ferroresonance are
■Manual switching of an unloaded, cable-fed, three-phase trans-
former where only one phase is closed (Fig. 4.14a). Ferroresonance
may be noted when the first phase is closed upon energization or
before the last phase is opened on deenergization.
■Manual switching of an unloaded, cable-fed, three-phase trans-
former where one of the phases is open (Fig. 4.14b). Again, this may
happen during energization or deenergization.
■One or two riser-pole fuses may blow leaving a transformer with one
or two phases open. Single-phase reclosers may also cause this con-
dition. Today, many modern commercial loads have controls that
transfer the load to backup systems when they sense this condition.
Unfortunately, this leaves the transformer without any load to damp
out the resonance.
It should be noted that these events do not always yield noticeable fer-
roresonance. Some utility personnel claim to have worked with under-
ground cable systems for decades without seeing ferroresonance. System
conditions that help increase the likelihood of ferroresonance include
■Higher distribution voltage levels, most notably 25- and 35-kV-class
systems
■Switching of lightly loaded and unloaded transformers
■Ungrounded transformer primary connections
124
Chapter Four
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Very lengthy underground cable circuits
■Cable damage and manual switching during construction of under-
ground cable systems
■Weak systems, i.e., low short-circuit currents
■Low-loss transformers
■Three-phase systems with single-phase switching devices
Transient Overvoltages
125
A
B
C
(a)
A
B
C
(b)
Figure 4.14
Common system conditions where ferroresonance
may occur: (a) one phase closed, (b) one phase open.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

While it is easier to cause ferroresonance at the higher voltage lev-
els, its occurrence is possible at all distribution voltage levels. The pro-
portion of losses, magnetizing reactance, and capacitance at lower
levels may limit the effects of ferroresonance, but it can still occur.
There are several modes of ferroresonance with varying physical and
electrical manifestations. Some have very high voltages and currents,
while others have voltages close to normal. There may or may not be
failures or other evidence of ferroresonance in the electrical compo-
nents. Therefore, it may be difficult to tell if ferroresonance has
occurred in many cases, unless there are witnesses or power quality
measurement instruments.
Common indicators of ferroresonance are as follows.
Audible noise.
During ferroresonance, there may be an audible noise,
often likened to that of a large bucket of bolts being shook, whining, a
buzzer, or an anvil chorus pounding on the transformer enclosure from
within. The noise is caused by the magnetostriction of the steel core
being driven into saturation. While difficult to describe in words, this
noise is distinctively different and louder than the normal hum of a
transformer. Most electrical system operating personnel are able to rec-
ognize it immediately upon first hearing it.
Overheating.
Transformer overheating often, although not always,
accompanies ferroresonance. This is especially true when the iron core
is driven deep into saturation. Since the core is saturated repeatedly,
the magnetic flux will find its way into parts of the transformer where
the flux is not expected such as the tank wall and other metallic parts.
The stray flux heating is often evidenced from the charring or bubbling
of the paint on the top of the tank. This is not necessarily an indication
that the unit is damaged, but damage can occur in this situation if fer-
roresonance has persisted sufficiently long to cause overheating of
some of the larger internal connections. This may in turn damage solid
insulation structures beyond repair. It should be noted that some
transformers exhibiting signs of ferroresonance such as loud, chaotic
noises do not show signs of appreciable heating. The design of the
transformer and the ferroresonance mode determine how the trans-
former will respond.
High overvoltages and surge arrester failure.
When overvoltages accom-
pany ferroresonance, there could be electrical damage to both the pri-
mary and secondary circuits. Surge arresters are common casualties of
the event. They are designed to intercept brief overvoltages and clamp
them to an acceptable level. While they may be able to withstand 
126
Chapter Four
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

several overvoltage events, there is a definite limit to their energy
absorption capabilities. Low-voltage arresters in end-user facilities are
more susceptible than utility arresters, and their failure is sometimes
the only indication that ferroresonance has occurred.
Flicker.
During ferroresonance the voltage magnitude may fluctuate
wildly. End users at the secondary circuit may actually see their light
bulbs flicker. Some electronic appliances may be very susceptible to
such voltage excursions. Prolonged exposure can shorten the expected
life of the equipment or may cause immediate failure. In facilities that
transfer over to the UPS system in the event of utility-side distur-
bances, repeated and persistent sounding of the alarms on the UPS
may occur as the voltage fluctuates.
4.1.5
Other switching transients
Line energization transients occur, as the term implies, when a switch
is closed connecting a line to the power system. They generally involve
higher-frequency content than capacitor energizing transients. The
transients are a result of a combination of traveling-wave effects and
the interaction of the line capacitance and the system equivalent
source inductance. Traveling waves are caused by the distributed
nature of the capacitance and inductance of the transmission or dis-
tribution line. Line energizing transients typically result in rather
benign overvoltages at distribution voltage levels and generally do not
cause any concern. It is very unusual to implement any kind of switch-
ing control for line energizing except for transmission lines operating
at 345 kV and above. Line energizing transients usually die out in
about 0.5 cycle.
The energization transients on distribution feeder circuits consist of
a combination of line energizing transients, transformer energizing
inrush characteristics, and load inrush characteristics. Figure 4.15
shows a typical case in which the monitor was located on the line side
of the switch. The initial transient frequency is above 1.0 kHz and
appears as a small amount of “hash” on the front of the waveform.
Following the energization, the voltage displays noticeable distortion
caused by the transformer inrush current that contains a number of
low-order harmonic components, including the second and fourth har-
monics. This is evidenced by the lack of symmetry in the voltage wave-
form in the few cycles recorded. This will eventually die out in nearly
all cases. The first peak of the current waveform displays the basic
characteristic of magnetizing inrush, which is subsequently swamped
by the load inrush current.
Transient Overvoltages
127
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Line energizing transients do not usually pose a problem for end-
user equipment. Equipment can be protected from the high-frequency
components with inductive chokes and surge protective devices if 
necessary. The example shown in Fig. 4.15 is relatively benign and
should pose few problems. Cases with less load may exhibit much more
oscillatory behavior.
Another source for overvoltages that is somewhat related to switch-
ing is the common single-line-to-ground fault. On a system with high,
zero-sequence impedance, the sound phase will experience a voltage
rise during the fault. The typical voltage rise on effectively grounded
four-wire, multigrounded neutral systems is generally no more than 15
to 20 percent. On systems with neutral reactors that limit the fault cur-
rent, for example, the voltage rise may reach 40 to 50 percent. This
overvoltage is temporary and will disappear after the fault is cleared.
These overvoltages are not often a problem, but there are potential
problems if the fault clearing is slow:
■Some secondary arresters installed by end users attempt to clamp
the voltage to as low as 110 percent voltage in the—perhaps mis-
taken—belief that this offers better insulation protection. Such
arresters are subject to failure when conducting several cycles of
power frequency current.
128
Chapter Four
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
–20
–10
0
10
20
Voltage (kV)
Time (ms)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
–400
–200
0
200
400
Current (A)
Time (ms)
(b)
(a)
Figure 4.15
Energizing a distribution feeder: (a) voltage and (b) current
waveforms.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Adjustable-speed-drive controls may presume a failure if the dc bus
voltage goes too high and trips the machine.
■Distributed generation interconnected with the utility system will
often interpret voltages in excess of 120 percent as warranting
immediate disconnection (less than 10 cycles). Therefore, nuisance
tripping is a likely result.
Of course, the actual impact of this overvoltage on the secondary side
of the system depends heavily on the service transformer connection.
While the common grounded wye-wye connection will transform the
voltages directly, transformers with a delta connection will help protect
the load from seeing overvoltages due to these faults.
4.2
Principles of Overvoltage Protection
The fundamental principles of overvoltage protection of load equip-
ment are
1. Limit the voltage across sensitive insulation.
2. Divert the surge current away from the load.
3. Block the surge current from entering the load.
4. Bond grounds together at the equipment.
5. Reduce, or prevent, surge current from flowing between grounds.
6. Create a low-pass filter using limiting and blocking principles.
Figure 4.16 illustrates these principles, which are applied to protect
from a lightning strike.
The main function of surge arresters and transient voltage surge
suppressors (TVSSs) is to limit the voltage that can appear between
two points in the circuit. This is an important concept to understand.
One of the common misconceptions about varistors, and similar
devices, is that they somehow are able to absorb the surge or divert it
to ground independently of the rest of the system. That may be a ben-
eficial side effect of the arrester application if there is a suitable path
for the surge current to flow into, but the foremost concern in arrester
application is to place the arresters directly across the sensitive insu-
lation that is to be protected so that the voltage seen by the insulation
is limited to a safe value. Surge currents, just like power currents, must
obey Kirchoff’s laws. They must flow in a complete circuit, and they
cause a voltage drop in every conductor through which they flow.
One of the points to which arresters, or surge suppressors, are con-
nected is frequently the local ground, but this need not be the case.
Transient Overvoltages
129
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Keep in mind that the local ground may not remain at zero potential
during transient impulse events.
Surge suppression devices should be located as closely as possible to
the critical insulation with a minimum of lead length on all terminals.
While it is common to find arresters located at the main panels and
subpanels, arresters applied at the point where the power line enters
the load equipment are generally the most effective in protecting that
particular load. In some cases, the best location is actually inside the
load device. For example, many electronic controls made for service in
the power system environment have protectors [metal-oxide varistor
(MOV) arresters, gaps, zener diodes, or surge capacitors] on every line
that leaves the cabinet.
In Fig. 4.16 the first arrester is connected from the line to the neu-
tral-ground bond at the service entrance. It limits the line voltage V1
from rising too high relative to the neutral and ground voltage at the
panel. When it performs its voltage-limiting action, it provides a low-
impedance path for the surge current to travel onto the ground lead.
Note that the ground lead and the ground connection itself have sig-
nificant impedance. Therefore, the potential of the whole power system
is raised with respect to that of the remote ground by the voltage drop
across the ground impedance. For common values of surge currents
and ground impedances, this can be several kilovolts.
One hopes, in this situation, that most of the surge energy will be dis-
charged through the first arrester directly into ground. In that sense,
the arrester becomes a surge “diverter.” This is another important
130
Chapter Four
POWER SOURCE
SENSITIVE
LOAD
GROUND
IMPEDANCE
SURGE
CURRENT
DIVERTED TO
GROUND
LINE
IMPEDANCE
LIGHTNING
SURGE
CURRENT
= ARRESTER
BONDED AT
LOCAL GROUND
REFERENCE
EXTERNAL
SIGNAL
CABLE
LOW-PASS FILTER EQUIV.
V
V
1
2
Figure 4.16
Demonstrating the principles of overvoltage protection.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

function related to surge arrester application. In fact, some prefer to
call a surge arrester a surge diverter because its voltage-limiting action
offers a low-impedance path around the load being protected. However,
it can only be a diverter if there is a suitable path into which the cur-
rent can be diverted. That is not always easy to achieve, and the surge
current is sometimes diverted toward another critical load where it is
not wanted.
In this figure, there is another possible path for the surge current—
the signal cable indicated by the dotted line and bonded to the safety
ground. If this is connected to another device that is referenced to
ground elsewhere, there will be some amount of surge current flowing
down the safety ground conductor. Damaging voltages can be
impressed across the load as a result. The first arrester at the service
entrance is electrically too remote to provide adequate load protection.
Therefore, a second arrester is applied at the load—again, directly
across the insulation to be protected. It is connected “line to neutral” so
that it only protects against normal mode transients. This illustrates
the principles without complicating the diagram but should be consid-
ered as the minimum protection one would apply to protect the load.
Frequently, surge suppressors will have suppression on all lines to
ground, all lines to neutral, and neutral to ground.
While lightning surge currents are seeking a remote ground refer-
ence, many transient overvoltages generated by switching will be those
of a normal mode and will not seek ground. In cases where surge cur-
rents are diverted into other load circuits, arresters must be applied at
each load along the path to ensure protection.
Note that the signal cable is bonded to the local ground reference at
the load just before the cable enters the cabinet. It might seem that this
creates an unwanted ground loop. However, it is essential to achieving
protection of the load and the low-voltage signal circuits. Otherwise,
the power components can rise in potential with respect to the signal
circuit reference by several kilovolts. Many loads have multiple power
and signal cables connected to them. Also, a load may be in an envi-
ronment where it is close to another load and operators or sensitive
equipment are routinely in contact with both loads. This raises the pos-
sibility that a lightning strike may raise the potential of one ground
much higher than the others. This can cause a flashover across the
insulation that is between the two ground references or cause physical
harm to operators. Thus, all ground reference conductors (safety
grounds, cable shields, cabinets, etc.) should be bonded together at the
load equipment. The principle is not to prevent the local ground refer-
ence from rising in potential with the surge; with lightning, that is
impossible. Rather, the principle is to tie the references together so that
all power and signal cable references in the vicinity rise together.
Transient Overvoltages
131
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

This phenomenon is a common reason for failure of electronic
devices. The situation occurs in TV receivers connected to cables, com-
puters connected to modems, computers with widespread peripherals
powered from various sources, and in manufacturing facilities with
networked machines.
Since a few feet of conductor make a significant difference at light-
ning surge frequencies, it is sometimes necessary to create a special
low-inductance, ground reference plane for sensitive electronic equip-
ment such as mainframe computers that occupy large spaces.4
Efforts to block the surge current are most effective for high-fre-
quency surge currents such as those originating with lightning strokes
and capacitor-switching events. Since power frequency currents must
pass through the surge suppressor with minimal additional imped-
ance, it is difficult and expensive to build filters that are capable of 
discriminating between low-frequency surges and power frequency
currents.
Blocking can be done relatively easily for high-frequency transients
by placing an inductor, or choke, in series with the load. The high surge
voltage will drop across the inductor. One must carefully consider that
high voltage could damage the insulation of both the inductor and the
loads. However, a line choke alone is frequently an effective means to
block such high-frequency transients as line-notching transients from
adjustable-speed drives.
The blocking function is frequently combined with the voltage-limit-
ing function to form a low-pass filter in which there is a shunt-con-
nected voltage-limiting device on either side of the series choke. Figure
4.16 illustrates how such a circuit naturally occurs when there are
arresters on both ends of the line feeding the load. The line provides the
blocking function in proportion to its length. Such a circuit has very
beneficial overvoltage protection characteristics. The inductance forces
the bulk of fast-rising surges into the first arrester. The second arrester
then simply has to accommodate what little surge energy gets through.
Such circuits are commonly built into outlet strips for computer pro-
tection.
Many surge-protection problems occur because the surge current
travels between two, or more, separate connections to ground. This is a
particular problem with lightning protection because lightning cur-
rents are seeking ground and basically divide according to the ratios of
the impedances of the ground paths. The surge current does not even
have to enter the power, or phase, conductors to cause problems. There
will be a significant voltage drop along the ground conductors that will
frequently appear across critical insulation. The grounds involved may
be entirely within the load facility, or some of the grounds may be on
the utility system.
132
Chapter Four
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Ideally, there would be only one ground path for lightning within a
facility, but many facilities have multiple paths. For example, there
may be a driven ground at the service entrance or substation trans-
former and a second ground at a water well that actually creates a bet-
ter ground. Thus, when lightning strikes, the bulk of the surge current
will tend to flow toward the well. This can impress an excessively high
voltage across the pump insulation, even if the electrical system is not
intentionally bonded to a second ground. When lightning strikes, the
potentials can become so great that the power system insulation will
flash over somewhere.
The amount of current flowing between the grounds may be reduced
by improving all the intentional grounds at the service entrance and
nearby on the utility system. This will normally reduce, but not elimi-
nate entirely, the incidence of equipment failure within the facility due
to lightning. However, some structures also have significant lightning
exposure, and the damaging surge currents can flow back into the util-
ity grounds. It doesn’t matter which direction the currents flow; they
cause the same problems. Again, the same principle applies, which is
to improve the grounds for the structure to minimize the amount of cur-
rent that might seek another path to ground.
When it is impractical to keep the currents from flowing between two
grounds, both ends of any power or signal cables running between the
two grounds must be protected with voltage-limiting devices to ensure
adequate protection. This is common practice for both utility and end-
user systems where a control cabinet is located quite some distance
from the switch, or other device, being controlled.
4.3
Devices for Overvoltage Protection
4.3.1
Surge arresters and transient voltage
surge suppressors
Arresters and TVSS devices protect equipment from transient over-
voltages by limiting the maximum voltage, and the terms are some-
times used interchangeably. However, TVSSs are generally associated
with devices used at the load equipment. A TVSS will sometimes have
more surge-limiting elements than an arrester, which most commonly
consists solely of MOV blocks. An arrester may have more energy-han-
dling capability; however, the distinction between the two is blurred by
common language usage.
The elements that make up these devices can be classified by two dif-
ferent modes of operation, crowbar and clamping.
Crowbar devices are normally open devices that conduct current
during overvoltage transients. Once the device conducts, the line volt-
age will drop to nearly zero due to the short circuit imposed across the
Transient Overvoltages
133
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

line. These devices are usually manufactured with a gap filled with
air or a special gas. The gap arcs over when a sufficiently high over-
voltage transient appears. Once the gap arcs over, usually power fre-
quency current, or “follow current,” will continue to flow in the gap
until the next current zero. Thus, these devices have the disadvan-
tage that the power frequency voltage drops to zero or to a very low
value for at least one-half cycle. This will cause some loads to drop off-
line unnecessarily.
Clamping devices for ac circuits are commonly nonlinear resistors
(varistors) that conduct very low amounts of current until an overvolt-
age occurs. Then they start to conduct heavily, and their impedance
drops rapidly with increasing voltage. These devices effectively conduct
increasing amounts of current (and energy) to limit the voltage rise of
a surge. They have an advantage over gap-type devices in that the volt-
age is not reduced below the conduction level when they begin to con-
duct the surge current. Zener diodes are also used in this application.
Example characteristics of MOV arresters for load systems are shown
in Figs. 4.17 and 4.18.
MOV arresters have two important ratings. The first is maximum con-
tinuous operating voltage (MCOV), which must be higher than the line
voltage and will often be at least 125 percent of the system nominal volt-
age. The second rating is the energy dissipation rating (in joules). MOVs
are available in a wide range of energy ratings. Figure 4.18 shows the
typical energy-handling capability versus operating voltages.
4.3.2
Isolation transformers
Figure 4.19 shows a diagram of an isolation transformer used to atten-
uate high-frequency noise and transients as they attempt to pass from
one side to the other. However, some common-mode and normal-mode
noise can still reach the load. An electrostatic shield, as shown in
Figure 4.20, is effective in eliminating common-mode noise. However,
some normal-mode noise can still reach the load due to magnetic and
capacitive coupling.
The chief characteristic of isolation transformers for electrically iso-
lating the load from the system for transients is their leakage induc-
tance. Therefore, high-frequency noise and transients are kept from
reaching the load, and any load-generated noise and transients are
kept from reaching the rest of the power system. Voltage notching due
to power electronic switching is one example of a problem that can be
limited to the load side by an isolation transformer. Capacitor-switch-
ing and lightning transients coming from the utility system can be
attenuated, thereby preventing nuisance tripping of adjustable-speed
drives and other equipment.
134
Chapter Four
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

An additional use of isolation transformers is that they allow the
user to define a new ground reference, or separately derived system.
This new neutral-to-ground bond limits neutral-to-ground voltages at
sensitive equipment.
4.3.3
Low-pass filters
Low-pass filters use the pi-circuit principle illustrated in Fig. 4.16 to
achieve even better protection for high-frequency transients. For gen-
eral usage in electric circuits, low-pass filters are composed of series
Transient Overvoltages
135
2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
Crest Voltage (per Unit)
.01
.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Crest Current (A)
Figure 4.17
Crest voltage versus crest amps.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Nominal Operating Voltage (V rms)
Energy Capability (kJ)
Figure 4.18
Energy capability versus operating voltage.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

inductors and parallel capacitors. This LC combination provides a low-
impedance path to ground for selected resonant frequencies. In surge
protection usage, voltage clamping devices are added in parallel to the
capacitors. In some designs, there are no capacitors.
Figure 4.21 shows a common hybrid protector that combines two
surge suppressors and a low-pass filter to provide maximum protec-
tion. It uses a gap-type protector on the front end to handle high-energy
transients. The low-pass filter limits transfer of high-frequency tran-
sients. The inductor helps block high-frequency transients and forces
them into the first suppressor. The capacitor limits the rate of rise,
while the nonlinear resistor (MOV) clamps the voltage magnitude at
the protected equipment.
Other variations on this design will employ MOVs on both sides of
the filters and may have capacitors on the front end as well.
4.3.4
Low-impedance power conditioners
Low-impedance power conditioners (LIPCs) are used primarily to
interface with the switch-mode power supplies found in electronic
136
Chapter Four
LINE
PRIMARY
SECONDARY
C
C
LOAD
Figure 4.19
Isolation transformer.
LINE
PRIMARY
SECONDARY
BOX
ELECTROSTATIC
SHIELD
C
LOAD
Figure 4.20
Isolation transformer with electrostatic shield.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

equipment. LIPCs differ from isolation transformers in that these con-
ditioners have a much lower impedance and have a filter as part of
their design (Fig. 4.22). The filter is on the output side and protects
against high-frequency, source-side, common-mode, and normal-mode
disturbances (i.e., noise and impulses). Note the new neutral-to-ground
connection that can be made on the load side because of the existence
of an isolation transformer. However, low- to medium-frequency tran-
sients (capacitor switching) can cause problems for LIPCs: The tran-
sient can be magnified by the output filter capacitor.
4.3.5
Utility surge arresters
The three most common surge arrester technologies employed by utili-
ties are depicted in Fig. 4.23. Most arresters manufactured today use a
MOV as the main voltage-limiting element. The chief ingredient of a
MOV is zinc oxide (ZnO), which is combined with several proprietary
ingredients to achieve the necessary characteristics and durability.
Older-technology arresters, of which there are still many installed on
the power system, used silicon carbide (SiC) as the energy-dissipating
nonlinear resistive element. The relative discharge voltages for each of
these three technologies are shown in Fig. 4.24.
Transient Overvoltages
137
Gap-Type
Protector
Low-Pass Filter
MOV
Input
Line
Protected
Line
Figure 4.21
Hybrid transient protector.
LOW-IMPEDANCE
TRANSFORMER
LINE
NEUTRAL
GROUND
LINE
NEUTRAL
GROUND
Figure 4.22
Low-impedance power conditioner.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Originally, arresters were little more than spark gaps, which would
result in a fault each time the gap sparked over. Also, the sparkover
transient injected a very steep fronted voltage wave into the apparatus
being protected, which was blamed for many insulation failures. The
addition of an SiC nonlinear resistance in series with a spark gap cor-
rected some of these difficulties. It allowed the spark gap to clear and
reseal without causing a fault and reduced the sparkover transient to
perhaps 50 percent of the total sparkover voltage (Fig. 4.24a). However,
138
Chapter Four
ZnO
ZnO
SiC
(a)
Gapped
Silicon
Carbide
(b)
Gapless
MOV
(c)
Gapped
MOV
Resistance-
Graded
Gap
Structure
Figure 4.23
Three common utility surge arrester technologies.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.24
Comparative lightning wave discharge voltage characteristics
for an 8  20 s wave corresponding to the utility surge arrester tech-
nologies in Fig. 4.23.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

insulation failures were still blamed on this front-of-wave transient.
Also, there is substantial power-follow current after sparkover, which
heats the SiC material and erodes the gap structures, eventually lead-
ing to arrester failures or loss of protection.
Gaps are necessary with the SiC because an economical SiC element
giving the required discharge voltage is unable to withstand continu-
ous system operating voltage. The development of MOV technology
enabled the elimination of the gaps. This technology could withstand
continuous system voltage without gaps and still provide a discharge
voltage comparable to the SiC arresters (see Fig. 4.24b). By the late
1980s, SiC arrester technology was being phased out in favor of the
gapless MOV technology. The gapless MOV provided a somewhat bet-
ter discharge characteristic without the objectionable sparkover tran-
sient. The majority of utility distribution arresters manufactured today
are of this design.
The gapped MOV technology was introduced commercially about
1990 and has gained acceptance in some applications where there is
need for increased protective margins. By combining resistance-graded
gaps (with SiC grading rings) and MOV blocks, this arrester technol-
ogy has some very interesting, and counterintuitive, characteristics. It
has a lower lightning-discharge voltage (Fig. 4.24c), but has a higher
transient overvoltage (TOV) withstand characteristic than a gapless
MOV arrester. To achieve the required protective level for lightning,
gapless MOV arresters typically begin to conduct heavily for low-fre-
quency transients at about 1.7 pu. There are some system conditions
where the switching transients will exceed this value for several cycles
and cause failures. Also, applications such as aging underground cable
systems demand lower lightning-discharge characteristics.
The gapped MOV technology removes about one-third of the MOV
blocks and replaces them with a gap structure having a lightning
sparkover approximately one-half of the old SiC technology. The
smaller number of MOV blocks yields a lightning-discharge voltage
typically 20 to 30 percent less than a gapless MOV arrester. Because of
the capacitive and resistive interaction of the grading rings and MOV
blocks, most of the front-of-wave impulse voltage of lightning tran-
sients appears across the gaps. They spark over very early into the
MOV blocks, yielding a minor sparkover transient on the front.5 For
switching transients, the voltage divides by resistance ratios and most
of it appears first across the MOV blocks, which hold off conduction
until the gaps spark over. This enables this technology to achieve a
TOV withstand of approximately 2.0 pu in typical designs.
Additionally, the energy dissipated in the arrester is less than dissi-
pated by gapless designs for the same lightning current because of the
lower voltage discharge of the MOV blocks. There is no power-follow
Transient Overvoltages
139
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

current because there is sufficient MOV capability to block the flow.
This minimizes the erosion of the gaps. In several ways, this technol-
ogy holds the promise of yielding a more capable and durable utility
surge arrester.
Utility surge arresters are manufactured in various sizes and rat-
ings. The three basic rating classes are designated distribution, inter-
mediate, and station in increasing order of their energy-handling
capability. Most of the arresters applied on primary distribution feed-
ers are distribution class. Within this class, there are both small-block
and heavy-duty designs. One common exception to this is that some-
times intermediate- or station-class arresters are applied at riser poles
to obtain a better protective characteristic (lower discharge voltage) for
the cable.
4.4
Utility Capacitor-Switching Transients
This section describes how utilities can deal with problems related to
capacitor-switching transients.
4.4.1
Switching times
Capacitor-switching transients are very common and usually not dam-
aging. However, the timing of switching may be unfortunate for some
sensitive industrial loads. For example, if the load picks up the same
time each day, the utility may decide to switch the capacitors coincident
with that load increase. There have been several cases where this coin-
cides with the beginning of a work shift and the resulting transient
causes several adjustable-speed drives to shut down shortly after the
process starts. One simple and inexpensive solution is to determine if
there is a switching time that might be more acceptable. For example,
it may be possible to switch on the capacitor a few minutes before the
beginning of the shift and before the load actually picks up. It may not
be needed then, but probably won’t hurt anything. If this can’t be
worked out, other, more expensive solutions will have to be found.
4.4.2
Preinsertion resistors
Preinsertion resistors can reduce the capacitor-switching transient
considerably. The first peak of the transient is usually the most dam-
aging. The idea is to insert a resistor into the circuit briefly so that the
first peak is damped significantly. This is old technology but is still
quite effective.
Figure 4.25 shows one example of a capacitor switch with preinser-
tion resistors to reduce transients. The preinsertion is accomplished by
the movable contacts sliding past the resistor contacts first before mat-
140
Chapter Four
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ing with the main contacts. This results in a preinsertion time of
approximately one-fourth of a cycle at 60 hertz (Hz). The effectiveness
of the resistors is dependent on capacitor size and available short-cir-
cuit current at the capacitor location. Table 4.1 shows expected maxi-
mum transient overvoltages upon energization for various conditions,
both with and without the preinsertion resistors. These are the maxi-
mum values expected; average values are typically 1.3 to 1.4 pu with-
out resistors and 1.1. to 1.2 pu with resistors.
Switches with preinsertion reactors have also been developed for this
purpose. The inductor is helpful in limiting the higher-frequency com-
ponents of the transient. In some designs, the reactors are intention-
ally built with high resistance so that they appear lossy to the
energization transient. This helps the transient damp out quickly.
4.4.3
Synchronous closing
Another popular strategy for reducing transients on capacitor switch-
ing is to use a synchronous closing breaker. This is a relatively new
technology for controlling capacitor-switching transients. Synchronous
Transient Overvoltages
141
DAMPING RESISTOR
LOAD-CARRYING
CONTACTS
ARCING CONTACTS
Figure 4.25
Capacitor switch with preinsertion resistors. (Courtesy of Cooper
Power Systems.)
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

closing prevents transients by timing the contact closure such that the
system voltage closely matches the capacitor voltage at the instant the
contacts mate. This avoids the step change in voltage that normally
occurs when capacitors are switched, causing the circuit to oscillate.
Figure 4.26 shows one example of a circuit breaker designed for this
purpose. This breaker would normally be applied on the utility sub-
transmission or transmission system (72- and 145-kV classes). This is
a three-phase SF6 breaker that uses a specially designed operating
mechanism with three independently controllable drive rods. It is
capable of closing within 1 ms of voltage zero. The electronic control
samples variables such as ambient temperature, control voltage, stored
energy, and the time since the last operation to compensate the algo-
rithms for the timing forecast. The actual performance of the breaker
is sampled to adjust the pole timing for future operations to compen-
sate for wear and changes in mechanical characteristics.
Figure 4.27 shows a vacuum switch made for this purpose. It is
applied on 46-kV-class capacitor banks. It consists of three independent
poles with separate controls. The timing for synchronous closing is
determined by anticipating an upcoming voltage zero. Its success is
dependent on the consistent operation of the vacuum switch. The
switch reduces capacitor inrush currents by an order of magnitude and
voltage transients to about 1.1 pu. A similar switch may also be used at
distribution voltages.
Figure 4.28 shows one phase of a newer type of three-phase synchro-
nous switch used for distribution capacitor banks. This particular tech-
nology uses a vacuum switch encapsulated in a solid dielectric.
Each of the switches described here requires a sophisticated micro-
processor-based control. Understandably, a synchronous closing sys-
142
Chapter Four
TABLE 4.1
Peak Transient Overvoltages Due to Capacitor
Switching with and without Preinsertion Resistor
Available short 
Without
With 6.4-
Size (kvar)
circuit (kA)
resistor (pu)
resistor (pu)
900
4
1.95
1.55
900
9
1.97
1.45
900
14
1.98
1.39
1200
4
1.94
1.50
1200
9
1.97
1.40
1200
14
1.98
1.34
1800
4
1.92
1.42
1800
9
1.96
1.33
1800
14
1.97
1.28
SOURCE: Courtesy of Cooper Power Systems.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Transient Overvoltages
143
Figure 4.26
Synchronous closing breaker. (Courtesy
of ABB, Inc.)
Figure 
4.27
Synchronous 
closing
capacitor switch. (Courtesy of Joslyn
Hi-Voltage Corporation.)
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tem is more expensive than a straightforward capacitor switch.
However, it is frequently a cost-effective solution when capacitor-
switching transients are disrupting end-user loads.
4.4.4
Capacitor location
For distribution feeder banks, a switched capacitor may be too close to
a sensitive load or at a location where the transient overvoltages tend
to be much higher. Often, it may be possible to move the capacitor
downline or to another branch of the circuit and eliminate the problem.
The strategy is to either create more damping with more resistance in
the circuit or to get more impedance between the capacitor and the sen-
sitive load.
The success of this strategy will depend on a number of factors. Of
course, if the capacitor is placed at a large load to supply reactive power
specifically for that load, moving the bank may not be an option. Then,
techniques for soft switching or switching at noncritical times must be
explored. Besides utility-side solutions, one should also explore load-
side solutions. In some cases, it will be more cost-effective to harden
load equipment against capacitor-switching transients by the applica-
tion of line chokes, TVSSs, etc.
144
Chapter Four
Figure 4.28
One pole of a syn-
chronous closing switch for dis-
tribution 
capacitor 
banks.
(Courtesy 
of 
Cooper 
Power
Systems.)
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

4.5
Utility System Lightning Protection
Many power quality problems stem from lightning. Not only can the
high-voltage impulses damage load equipment, but the temporary
fault that follows a lightning strike to the line causes voltage sags and
interruptions. Here are some strategies for utilities to use to decrease
the impact of lightning.
4.5.1
Shielding
One of the strategies open to utilities for lines that are particularly sus-
ceptible to lightning strikes is to shield the line by installing a
grounded neutral wire over the phase wires. This will intercept most
lightning strokes before they strike the phase wires. This can help, but
will not necessarily prevent line flashovers because of the possibility of
backflashovers.
Shielding overhead utility lines is common at transmission voltage
levels and in substations, but is not common on distribution lines
because of the added cost of taller poles and the lower benefit due to
lower flashover levels of the lines. On distribution circuits, the
grounded neutral wire is typically installed underneath the phase con-
ductors to facilitate the connection of line-to-neutral connected equip-
ment such as transformers and capacitors.
Shielding is not quite as simple as adding a wire and grounding it
every few poles. When lightning strikes the shield wire, the voltages at
the top of the pole will still be extremely high and could cause back-
flashovers to the line. This will result in a temporary fault. To minimize
this possibility, the path of the ground lead down the pole must be care-
fully chosen to maintain adequate clearance with the phase conduc-
tors. Also, the grounding resistance plays an important role in the
magnitude of the voltage and must be maintained as low as possible.
However, when it becomes obvious that a particular section of feeder
is being struck frequently, it may be justifiable to retrofit that section
with a shield wire to reduce the number of transient faults and to main-
tain a higher level of power quality. Figure 4.29 illustrates this concept.
It is not uncommon for a few spans near the substation to be shielded.
The substation is generally shielded anyway, and this helps prevent
high-current faults close to the substation that can damage the sub-
station transformer and breakers. It is also common near substations
for distribution lines to be underbuilt on transmission or subtransmis-
sion structures. Since the transmission is shielded, this provides
shielding for the distribution as well, provided adequate clearance can
be maintained for the ground lead. This is not always an easy task.
Another section of the feeder may crest a ridge giving it unusual
exposure to lightning. Shielding in that area may be an effective way of
Transient Overvoltages
145
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

reducing lightning-induced faults. Poles in the affected section may
have to be extended to accommodate the shield wire and considerable
effort put into improving the grounds. This increases the cost of this
solution. It is possible that line arresters would be a more economical
and effective option for many applications.
4.5.2
Line arresters
Another strategy for lines that are struck frequently is to apply
arresters periodically along the phase wires. Normally, lines flash over
first at the pole insulators. Therefore, preventing insulator flashover
will reduce the interruption and sag rate significantly. Stansberry6
argues that this is more economical than shielding and results in fewer
line flashovers. Neither shielding nor line arresters will prevent all
flashovers from lightning. The aim is to significantly reduce flashovers
in particular trouble spots.
As shown in Fig. 4.30, the arresters bleed off some of the stroke cur-
rent as it passes along the line. The amount that an individual arrester
bleeds off will depend on the grounding resistance. The idea is to space
the arresters sufficiently close to prevent the voltage at unprotected
poles in the middle from exceeding the basic impulse level (BIL) of the
line insulators. This usually requires an arrester at every second or
third pole. In the case of a feeder supplying a highly critical load, or a
feeder with high ground resistance, it may be necessary to place
arresters at every pole. A transients study of different configurations
will show what is required.
Some utilities place line arresters only on the top phase when one
phase is mounted higher than the others. In other geometries, it will be
necessary to put arresters on all three phases to achieve a consistent
reduction in flashovers.
146
Chapter Four
SHIELDING AT
THE SUBSTATION 
SHIELDING
SPANS WITH
HIGH EXPOSURE 
Figure 4.29
Shielding a portion of a distribution feeder to reduce the incidence of
temporary lightning-induced faults.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Figure 4.31 shows a typical utility arrester that is used for overhead
line protection applications. This model consists of MOV blocks encap-
sulated in a polymer housing that is resistant to sunlight and other
natural elements. Older-technology models used porcelain housings
like that shown on the primary side of the transformer in Fig. 4.33.
There are already sufficient arresters on many lines in densely pop-
ulated areas in North America to achieve sufficient line protection.
These arresters are on the distribution transformers, which are
installed close together and in sufficient numbers in these areas to help
protect the lines from flashover.
4.5.3
Low-side surges
Some utility and end-user problems with lightning impulses are closely
related. One of the most significant ones is called the “low-side surge”
problem by many utility engineers.7 The name was coined by distribu-
tion transformer designers because it appears from the transformer’s
perspective that a current surge is suddenly injected into the low-volt-
age side terminals. Utilities have not applied secondary arresters at
Transient Overvoltages
147
- - -
- - -
Figure 4.30
Periodically spaced line arresters help prevent flashovers.
Figure 4.31
Typical polymer-housed
utility distribution arrester for over-
head line applications. (Courtesy of
Cooper Power Systems.)
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

low-voltage levels in great numbers. From the customer’s point of view
it appears to be an impulse coming from the utility and is likely to be
termed a secondary surge.
Both problems are actually different side effects of the same surge
phenomenon—lightning current flowing from either the utility side or
the customer side along the service cable neutral. Figure 4.32 shows
one possible scenario. Lightning strikes the primary line, and the cur-
rent is discharged through the primary arrester to the pole ground
lead. This lead is also connected to the X2 bushing of the transformer
at the top of the pole. Thus, some of the current will flow toward the
load ground. The amount of current into the load ground is primarily
dependent on the size of the pole ground resistance relative to the load
ground. Inductive elements may play a significant role in the current
division for the front of the surge, but the ground resistances basically
dictate the division of the bulk of the stroke current.
The current that flows through the secondary cables causes a voltage
drop in the neutral conductor that is only partially compensated by
mutual inductive effects with the phase conductors. Thus, there is a net
voltage across the cable, forcing current through the transformer sec-
ondary windings and into the load as shown by the dashed lines in Fig.
4.32. If there is a complete path, substantial surge current will flow. As
it flows through the transformer secondary, a surge voltage is induced
in the primary, sometimes causing a layer-to-layer insulation failure
148
Chapter Four
Triplex Service
Cable
Service
Entrance
Ground
Resistance
Ground
Lead
Inductance
Pole Ground Resistance
X1
X2
X3
H1
H2
Meter Gaps
Type NM w/ Grnd
B
W
G
G
B
W
Load
Load
Primary
Arrester
Primary Phase
Figure 4.32
Primary arrester discharge current divides between pole and load ground.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

near the grounded end. If there is not a complete path, the voltage will
build up across the load and may flash over somewhere on the sec-
ondary. It is common for the meter gaps to flash over, but not always
before there is damage on the secondary because the meter gaps are
usually 6 to 8 kV, or higher.
The amount of voltage induced in the cable is dependent on the rate
of rise of the current, which is dependent on other circuit parameters
as well as the lightning stroke.
The chief power quality problems this causes are
1. The impulse entering the load can cause failure or misoperation of
load equipment.
2. The utility transformer will fail causing an extended power outage.
3. The failing transformer may subject the load to sustained steady-
state overvoltages because part of the primary winding is shorted,
decreasing the transformer turns ratio. Failure usually occurs in
seconds but has been known to take hours.
The key to this problem is the amount of surge current traveling through
the secondary service cable. Keep in mind that the same effect occurs
regardless of the direction of the current. All that is required is for the cur-
rent to get into the ground circuits and for a substantial portion to flow
through the cable on its way to another ground. Thus, lightning strikes to
either the utility system or the end-user facilities have the same effects.
Transformer protection is more of an issue in residential services, but the
secondary transients will appear in industrial systems as well.
Protecting the transformer.
There are two common ways for the utility
to protect the transformer:
1. Use transformers with interlaced secondary windings.
2. Apply surge arresters at the X terminals.
Of course, the former is a design characteristic of the transformer and
cannot be changed once the transformer has been made. If the trans-
former is a noninterlaced design, the only option is to apply arresters
to the low-voltage side.
Note that arresters at the load service entrance will not protect the
transformer. In fact, they will virtually guarantee that there will be a
surge current path and thereby cause additional stress on the trans-
former.
While interlaced transformers have a lower failure rate in lightning-
prone areas than noninterlaced transformers, recent evidence suggests
that low-voltage arresters have better success in preventing failures.8
Transient Overvoltages
149
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Figure 4.33 shows an example of a well-protected utility pole-top dis-
tribution transformer.9 The primary arrester is mounted directly on the
tank with very short lead lengths. With the evidence mounting that
lightning surges have steeper wavefronts than previously believed,
this is an ever increasing requirement for good protection practice.10 It
requires a special fuse in the cutout to prevent fuse damage on light-
ning current discharge. The transformer protection is completed by
using a robust secondary arrester. This shows a heavy-duty, secondary
arrester adapted for external mounting on transformers. Internally
mounted arresters are also available. An arrester rating of 40-kA dis-
charge current is recommended. The voltage discharge is not extremely
critical in this application but is typically 3 to 5 kV. Transformer sec-
ondaries are generally assumed to have a BIL of 20 to 30 kV. Gap-type
arresters also work in this application but cause voltage sags, which
the MOV-type arresters avoid.
Impact on load circuits.
Figure 4.34 shows a waveform of the open-cir-
cuit voltage measured at an electrical outlet location in a laboratory
mock-up of a residential service.12 For a relatively small stroke to the
150
Chapter Four
Figure 4.33
Example of a distribution transformer protected
against lightning with tank-mounted primary and secondary
arresters. (Courtesy of Cooper Power Systems.)
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

primary line (2.6 kA), the voltages at the outlet reached nearly 15 kV.
In fact, higher-current strokes caused random flashovers of the test cir-
cuit, which made measurements difficult. This reported experience is
indicative of the capacity of these surges to cause overvoltage problems.
The waveform is a very high frequency ringing wave riding on the
main part of the low-side surge. The ringing is very sensitive to the
cable lengths. A small amount of resistive load such as a light bulb
would contribute greatly to the damping. The ringing wave differs
depending on where the surge was applied, while the base low-side
surge wave remains about the same; it is more dependent on the wave-
form of the current through the service cable.
One interesting aspect of this wave is that the ringing is so fast that it
gets by the spark gaps in the meter base even though the voltage is 2
times the nominal sparkover value. In the tests, the outlets and lamp
sockets could also withstand this kind of wave for about 1 s before they
flashed over. Thus, it is possible to have some high overvoltages propa-
gating throughout the system. The waveform in this figure represents
the available open-circuit voltage. In actual practice, a flashover would
have occurred somewhere in the circuit after a brief time.
MOV arresters are not entirely effective against a ringing wave of
this high frequency because of lead-length inductance. However, they
Transient Overvoltages
151
X1 SIDE
X1 SIDE
X3 SIDE
X3 SIDE
2.6-kA
STROKE TO
PRIMARY
2.6-kA
STROKE TO
SERVICE ENTRANCE
VOLTAGE  5 kV/div
TIME  2 s/div
Figure 4.34
Voltage appearing at outlet due to low-side surge phenom-
ena.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

are very effective for the lower-frequency portion of this transient,
which contains the greater energy. Arresters should be applied both in
the service entrance and at the outlets serving sensitive loads. Without
the service entrance arresters to take most of the energy, arresters at
the outlets are subject to failure. This is particularly true of single
MOVs connected line to neutral. With the service entrance arresters,
failure of outlet protectors and individual appliance protectors should
be very rare unless lightning strikes the building structure closer to
that location than the service entrance.
Service entrance arresters cannot be relied upon to protect the entire
facility. They serve a useful purpose in shunting the bulk of the surge
energy but cannot suppress the voltage sufficiently for remote loads.
Likewise, the transformer arrester cannot be considered to take the
place of the service entrance arrester although it may be only 50 ft (15
meters) away. This arrester is actually in series with the load for the
low-side current surge. The basic guideline for arrester protection
should always be followed: Place an arrester directly across the insula-
tion structure that is to be protected. This becomes crucial for difficult-
to-protect loads such as submersible pumps in deep water wells. The
best protection is afforded by an arrester built directly into the motor
rather than on the surface in the controller.
Some cases may not have as much to do with the surge voltage
appearing at the outlet as with the differential voltage between two
ground references. Such is the case for many TV receiver failures.
Correct bonding of protective grounds is required as well as arrester
protection.
The protective level of service entrance arresters for lightning
impulses is typically about 2 kV. The lightning impulse current-carry-
ing capability should be similar to the transformer secondary arrester,
or approximately 40 kA. One must keep in mind that for low-frequency
overvoltages, the arrester with the lowest discharge voltage is apt to
take the brunt of the duty. MOV-type arresters will clamp the over-
voltages without causing additional power quality problems such as
interruptions and sags.
4.5.4
Cable protection
One increasingly significant source of extended power outages on
underground distribution (UD) systems is cable failures. The earliest
utility distribution cables installed in the United States are now reach-
ing the end of their useful life. As a cable ages, the insulation becomes
progressively weaker and a moderate transient overvoltage causes
breakdown and failure.
152
Chapter Four
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Many utilities are exploring ways of extending the cable life by
arrester protection. Cable replacement is so costly that it is often
worthwhile to retrofit the system with arresters even if the gain in life
is only a few years. Depending on voltage class, the cable may have
been installed with only one arrester at the riser pole or both a riser-
pole arrester and an open-point arrester (see Fig. 4.35).
To provide additional protection, utilities may choose from a number
of options:
1. Add an open-point arrester, if one does not exist.
2. Add a third arrester on the next-to-last transformer.
3. Add arresters at every transformer.
4. Add special low-discharge voltage arresters.
5. Inject an insulation-restoring fluid into the cable.
6. Employ a scout arrester scheme on the primary (see Sec. 4.5.5).
The cable life is an exponential function of the number of impulses of a
certain magnitude that it receives, according to Hopkinson.11 The dam-
age to the cable is related by
D  NVc
where D  constant, representing damage to the cable
N  number of impulses
V  magnitude of impulses
c  empirical constant ranging from 10 to 15
Therefore, anything that will decrease the magnitude of the impulses
only slightly has the potential to extend cable life a great deal.
Transient Overvoltages
153
RISER-POLE
ARRESTER
OPEN-POINT
ARRESTER
PAD-MOUNT
TRANSFORMER
Figure 4.35
Typical UD cable arrester application.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Open-point arrester.
Voltage waves double in magnitude when they
strike an open point. Thus, the peak voltage appearing on the cable
is about twice the discharge voltage of the riser-pole arrester. There
is sufficient margin with new cables to get by without open-point
arresters at some voltage classes. While open-point arresters are
common at 35 kV, they are not used universally at lower voltage
classes.
When the number of cable failures associated with storms begins to
increase noticeably, the first option should be to add an arrester at the
open point if there is not already one present.
Next-to-last transformer.
Open-point arresters do not completely elimi-
nate cable failures during lightning storms. With an open-point
arrester, the greatest overvoltage stress is generally found at the next-
to-last transformer. Figure 4.36 illustrates the phenomenon. Before the
open-point arrester begins to conduct, it reflects the incoming wave just
like an open circuit. Therefore, there is a wave of approximately half
the discharge voltage reflected back to the riser pole. This can be even
higher if the wavefront is very steep and the arrester lead inductance
aids the reflection briefly.
This results in a very short pulse riding on top of the voltage wave
that dissipates fairly rapidly as it flows toward the riser pole. However,
at transformers within a few hundred feet of the open point there will
be noticeable additional stress. Thus, we often see cable and trans-
former failures at this location.
154
Chapter Four
VOLTAGE 40.00 kV/div
TIME 0.500 s/div
OPEN POINT
NEXT-TO-LAST TRANSFORMER
RISER POLE
Figure 4.36
Impulse voltages along a cable with an open-point arrester showing that the
peak can occur at the next-to-last transformer. Simulation with UDSurge computer pro-
gram. (Courtesy of Cooper Power Systems.)
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The problem is readily solved by an additional arrester at the next-
to-last transformer. In fact, this second arrester practically obliterates
the impulse, providing effective protection for the rest of the cable sys-
tem as well. Thus, some consider the most optimal UD cable protection
configuration to be three arresters: a riser-pole arrester, an open-point
arrester, and an arrester at the transformer next closest to the open
point. This choice protects as well as having arresters at all transform-
ers and is less costly, particularly in retrofitting.
Under-oil arresters.
Transformer manufacturers can supply pad-
mounted transformers for UD cable systems with the primary
arresters inside the transformer compartment, under oil. If applied
consistently, this achieves very good protection of the UD cable system
by having arresters distributed along the cable. Of course, this protec-
tion comes at an incremental cost that must be evaluated to determine
if it is economical for a utility to consider.
Elbow arresters.
The introduction of elbow arresters for transformer
connections in UD cable systems has opened up protection options not
previously economical. Previously, arrester installations on UD cable
systems were adaptations of overhead arrester technology and were
costly to implement. That is one reason why open-point arresters have
not been used universally. The other alternative was under-oil
arresters and it is also very costly to change out a pad-mount trans-
former just to get an open-point arrester. Now, the arrester is an inte-
gral part of the UD system hardware and installation at nearly any
point on the system is practical. This is a particularly good option for
many retrofit programs.
Lower-discharge arresters.
The gapped MOV arrester technology
described earlier in this chapter was developed specifically to improve
the surge protection for UD cables and prolong their life. The arresters
are able to achieve a substantially lower discharge voltage under light-
ning surge conditions while still providing the capability to withstand
normal system conditions. By combining the gaps from the old SiC
technology with fewer MOV blocks, a 20 to 30 percent gain could be
made in the lightning protective margin. The gaps share the voltage
with the MOV blocks during steady-state operation and prevent ther-
mal runaway. Following the logic of the Hopkinson formula, presented
at the beginning of this section, converting to this kind of arrester in
the UD cable system can be expected to yield a substantial increase in
cable life.
Transient Overvoltages
155
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Fluid injection.
This is a relatively new technology in which a restora-
tive fluid is injected into a run of cable. The fluid fills the voids that
have been created in the insulation by aging and gives the cable many
more years of life. A vacuum is pulled on the receiving end and pressure
is applied at the injection end. If there are no splices to block the flow,
the fluid slowly penetrates the cable.
4.5.5
Scout arrester scheme
The idea of using a scout arrester scheme to protect utility UD cable runs
goes back many years.13 However, the idea has only been applied sporad-
ically because of the additional initial expense. The concept is relatively
simple: Place arresters on either side of the riser-pole arrester to reduce
the lightning energy that can enter the cable. Figure 4.37 illustrates the
basic scheme. The incoming lightning surge current from a strike down-
line first encounters a scout arrester. A large portion of the current is dis-
charged into the ground at that location. A smaller portion proceeds on to
the riser-pole arrester, which now produces a smaller discharge voltage.
It is this voltage that is impressed upon the cable.
To further enhance the protection, the first span on either side of the
riser pole can be shielded to prevent direct strokes to the line.
More recently, there has been a revival of interest in the scheme.14
There is empirical evidence that the scout scheme helps prevent open-
point failures of both cables and transformers, and the expense of
changing out a transformer far exceeds the additional cost of the scout
arresters. Simulations suggest that while the nominal arrester dis-
156
Chapter Four
RISER-POLE
ARRESTER
SCOUT ARRESTERS
UD CABLE
INCOMING
SURGE
Figure 4.37
Scout arrester scheme.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

charge voltage may be reduced only a few percent, the greatest benefit
of the scout scheme may be that it greatly reduces the rate of rise of
surge voltages entering the cable. These steep-fronted surges reflect off
the open point and frequently cause failures at the first or second pad-
mount transformer from the end. Because of lead lengths, arresters are
not always effective against such steep impulses. The scout scheme
practically eliminates these from the cable.
Many distribution feeders in densely populated areas will have scout
schemes by default. There are sufficient numbers of transformers that
there are already arresters on either side of the riser pole.
4.6
Managing Ferroresonance
Ferroresonance in a distribution system occurs mainly when a lightly
loaded, three-phase transformer becomes isolated on a cable with one
or two open phases. This can happen both accidentally and intention-
ally. Strategies for dealing with ferroresonance include
■Preventing the open-phase condition
■Damping the resonance with load
■Limiting the overvoltages
■Limiting cable lengths
■Alternative cable-switching procedures
Most ferroresonance is a result of blown fuses in one or two of the
phases in response to faults, or some type of single-pole switching in
the primary circuit. A logical effective measure to guard against fer-
roresonance would be to use three-phase switching devices. For exam-
ple, a three-phase recloser or sectionalizer could be used at the riser
pole instead of fused cutouts. The main drawback is cost. Utilities could
not afford to do this at every riser pole, but this could be done in spe-
cial cases where there are particularly sensitive end users and frequent
fuse blowings.
Another strategy on troublesome cable drops is to simply replace the
fused cutouts with solid blades. This forces the upline recloser or
breaker to operate to clear faults on the cable. Of course, this subjects
many other utility customers to sustained interruptions when they
would have normally seen only a brief voltage sag. However, it is an
inexpensive way to handle the problem until a more permanent solu-
tion is implemented.
Manual, single-phase cable switching by pulling cutouts or cable
elbows is also a major source of ferroresonance. This is a particular
problem during new construction when there is a lot of activity and the
Transient Overvoltages
157
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

transformers are not yet loaded. Some utilities have reported that line
crews carry a “light board” or some other type of resistive load bank in
their trucks for use in cable-switching activity when the transformers
have no other load attached. One must be particularly careful when
switching delta-connected transformers; such transformers should be
protected because voltages may get extremely high. The common
grounded wye-wye pad-mounted transformer may not be damaged
internally if the exposure time is brief, although it may make consid-
erable noise. When switching manually, the goal should be to open or
close all three phases as promptly as possible.
Ferroresonance can generally be damped out by a relatively small
amount of resistive load, although there are exceptions. For the typ-
ical case with one phase open, a resistive load of 1 to 4 percent of the
transformer capacity can greatly reduce the effects of ferroreso-
nance. The amount of load required is dependent on the length of
cable and the design of the transformers. Also, the two-phase open
case is sometimes more difficult to dampen with load. Figure 4.38
shows the effect of loading on ferroresonance overvoltages for a
transformer connected to approximately 1.0 mi (1.61 km) of cable
with one phase open. This was a particularly difficult case that dam-
aged end-user equipment. Note the different characteristics of the
phases. The transformer was of a five-legged core design, and the
middle phase presents a condition that is more difficult to control
158
Chapter Four
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
A
B
C
Ferroresonant Voltage (per Unit)
Resistive Load @ 480 V BUS (% Transformer Capacity)
Figure 4.38
Example illustrating the impact of loading on ferroresonance.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

with loading. Five percent resistive load reduces the overvoltage
from approximately 2.8 to 2 pu. The transformer would have to be
loaded approximately 20 to 25 percent of resistive equivalent load to
limit ferroresonance overvoltages to 125 percent, the commonly
accepted threshold. Since such a large load is required, a three-phase
recloser was used to switch the cable.
On many utility systems, arresters are not applied on every pad-
mounted distribution transformer due to costs. However, surge
arresters can be an effective tool for suppressing the effects of ferrores-
onance. This is particularly true for transformers with ungrounded pri-
mary connections where the voltages can easily reach 3 to 4 pu if
unchecked. Primary arresters will generally limit the voltages to 1.7 to
2.0 pu. There is some risk that arresters will fail if subjected to fer-
roresonance voltages for a long time. In fact, secondary arresters with
protective levels lower than the primary-side arresters are frequent
casualties of ferroresonance. Utility arresters are more robust, and
there often is relatively little energy involved. However, if line crews
encounter a transformer with arresters in ferroresonance, they should
always deenergize the unit and allow the arresters to cool. An over-
heated arrester could fail violently if suddenly reconnected to a source
with significant short-circuit capacity.
Ferroresonance occurs when the cable capacitance reaches a critical
value sufficient to resonate with the transformer inductance (see Fig.
4.11). Therefore, one strategy to minimize the risk of frequent ferroreso-
nance problems is to limit the length of cable runs. This is difficult to do
for transformers with delta primary connections because with the high
magnetizing reactance of modern transformers, ferroresonance can
occur for cable runs of less than 100 ft. The grounded wye-wye connec-
tion will generally tolerate a few hundred feet of cable without exceeding
125 percent voltage during single-phasing situations. The allowable
length of cable is also dependent on the voltage level with the general
trend being that the higher the system voltage, the shorter the cable.
However, modern trends in transformer designs with lower losses and
exciting currents are making it more difficult to completely avoid fer-
roresonance at all primary distribution voltage levels.
The location of switching when energizing or deenergizing a trans-
former can play a critical role in reducing the likelihood of ferroreso-
nance. Consider the two cable-transformer switching sequences in Fig.
4.39. Figure 4.39a depicts switching at the transformer terminals after
the underground cable is energized, i.e., switch L is closed first, fol-
lowed by switch R. Ferroresonance is less likely to occur since the
equivalent capacitance seen from an open phase after each phase of
switch R closes is the transformer’s internal capacitance and does not
involve the cable capacitance. Figure 4.39b depicts energization of the
Transient Overvoltages
159
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

transformer remotely from another point in the cable system. The
equivalent capacitance seen from switch L is the cable capacitance, and
the likelihood of ferroresonance is much greater. Thus, one of the com-
mon rules to prevent ferroresonance during cable switching is to switch
the transformer by pulling the elbows at the primary terminals. There
is little internal capacitance, and the losses of the transformers are
usually sufficient to prevent resonance with this small capacitance.
This is still a good general rule, although the reader should be aware
that some modern transformers violate this rule. Low-loss transform-
ers, particularly those built with an amorphous metal core, are prone
to ferroresonance with their internal capacitances.
4.7
Switching Transient Problems 
with Loads
This section describes some transient problems related to loads and
load switching.
160
Chapter Four
(a)
underground cable
Switch L
Switch R
(b)
underground cable
Switch L
Switch R
Figure 4.39
Switching at the transformer terminals (a) reduces the risk of iso-
lating the transformer on sufficient capacitance to cause ferroresonance as
opposed to (b) switching at some other location upline.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

4.7.1
Nuisance tripping of ASDs
Most adjustable-speed drives typically use a voltage source inverter
(VSI) design with a capacitor in the dc link. The controls are sensitive
to dc overvoltages and may trip the drive at a level as low as 117 per-
cent. Since transient voltages due to utility capacitor switching typi-
cally exceed 130 percent, the probability of nuisance tripping of the
drive is high. One set of typical waveforms for this phenomenon is
shown in Fig. 4.40.
The most effective way to eliminate nuisance tripping of small drives
is to isolate them from the power system with ac line chokes. The addi-
tional series inductance of the choke will reduce the transient voltage
magnitude that appears at the input to the adjustable-speed drive.
Determining the precise inductor size required for a particular appli-
cation (based on utility capacitor size, transformer size, etc.) requires a
fairly detailed transient simulation. A series choke size of 3 percent
based on the drive kVA rating is usually sufficient.
4.7.2
Transients from load switching
Deenergizing inductive circuits with air-gap switches, such as relays
and contactors, can generate bursts of high-frequency impulses. Figure
4.41 shows an example. ANSI/IEEE C62.41-1991, Recommended
Practice for Surge Voltages in Low-Voltage AC Power Circuits, cites a
representative 15-ms burst composed of impulses having 5-ns rise
Transient Overvoltages
161
480-V Bus Voltage (phase-to-phase)
 33.3
 50.0
 66.7
 83.3
100.0
116.7
–1500
–1000
–500
    0
  500
 1000
 1500
Voltage (V)
Time (ms)
Figure 4.40
Effect of capacitor switching on adjustable-speed-drive ac current and dc
voltage.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

times and 50-ns durations. There is very little energy in these types of
transient due to the short duration, but they can interfere with the
operation of electronic loads.
Such electrical fast transient (EFT) activity, producing spikes up to 1
kV, is frequently due to cycling motors, such as air conditioners and ele-
vators. Transients as high as 3 kV can be caused by operation of arc
welders and motor starters.
The duration of each impulse is short compared to the travel time of
building wiring, thus the propagation of these impulses through the
162
Chapter Four
ac Drive Current during Capacitor Switching
 33.3
 50.0
 66.7
 83.3
100.0
116.7
–300
–200
–100
   0
 100
 200
 300
Time (ms)
Current (A)
dc Link Voltage during Capacitor Switching
 33.3
 50.0
 66.7
 83.3
100.0
116.7
500
550
600
650
700
750
Time (ms)
Current (A)
Figure 4.40
(Continued)
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

wiring can be analyzed with traveling wave theory. The impulses atten-
uate very quickly as they propagate through a building. Therefore, in
most cases, the only protection needed is electrical separation. Physical
separation is also required because the high rate of rise allows these
transients to couple into nearby sensitive equipment.
EFT suppression may be required with extremely sensitive equip-
ment in close proximity to a disturbing load, such as a computer room.
High-frequency filters and isolation transformers can be used to pro-
tect against conduction of EFTs on power cables. Shielding is required
to prevent coupling into equipment and data lines.
4.7.3
Transformer energizing
Energizing a transformer produces inrush currents that are rich in
harmonic components for a period lasting up to 1 s. If the system has a
parallel resonance near one of the harmonic frequencies, a dynamic
overvoltage condition results that can cause failure of arresters and
problems with sensitive equipment. This problem can occur when large
transformers are energized simultaneously with large power factor cor-
rection capacitor banks in industrial facilities. The equivalent circuit is
shown in Fig. 4.42. A dynamic overvoltage waveform caused by a third-
harmonic resonance in the circuit is shown in Fig. 4.43. After the
expected initial transient, the voltage again swells to nearly 150 per-
cent for many cycles until the losses and load damp out the oscillations.
This can place severe stress on some arresters and has been known to
significantly shorten the life of capacitors.
Transient Overvoltages
163
400V
0V
–400V
200 V/div VERTICAL 102.4 s/div HORIZ
1000V
0V
–1000V
500.0 V/div VERTICAL 5.0 ms/div HORIZ
Figure 4.41
Fast transients caused by deenergizing an inductive load.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

This form of dynamic overvoltage problem can often be eliminated
simply by not energizing the capacitor and transformer together. One
plant solved the problem by energizing the transformer first and not
energizing the capacitor until load was about to be connected to the
transformer.
4.8
Computer Tools for Transients Analysis
The most widely used computer programs for transients analysis of
power systems are the Electromagnetic Transients Program, com-
monly known as EMTP, and its derivatives such as the Alternate
Transients Program (ATP). EMTP was originally developed by
Hermann W. Dommel at the Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) in
the late 1960s15 and has been continuously upgraded since. One of the
reasons this program is popular is its low cost due to some versions
being in the public domain. Some of the simulations presented in this
164
Chapter Four
Figure 4.42
Energizing a capacitor and transformer
simultaneously can lead to dynamic overvoltages.
–2
–1
0
1
2
0
200
400
600
800
Phase A
Time (ms)
Voltage (V pu)
Figure 4.43
Dynamic overvoltages during transformer energizing.
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

book have been performed with a commercial analysis tool known as
PSCAD/EMTDC, a program developed by the Manitoba HVDC
Research Center. This program features a very sophisticated graphical
user interface that enables the user to be very productive in this diffi-
cult analysis. Some power system analysts use computer programs
developed more for the analysis of electronic circuits, such as the well-
known SPICE program16 and its derivatives.
Although the programs just discussed continue to be used exten-
sively, there are now many other capable programs available. We will
not attempt to list each one because there are so many and, also, at the
present rate of software development, any such list would soon be out-
dated. The reader is referred to the Internet since all vendors of this
type of software maintain websites.
Nearly all the tools for power systems solve the problem in the time
domain, re-creating the waveform point by point. A few programs solve
in the frequency domain and use the Fourier transform to convert to
the time domain. Unfortunately, this essentially restricts the address-
able problems to linear circuits. Time-domain solution is required to
model nonlinear elements such as surge arresters and transformer
magnetizing characteristics. The penalty for this extra capability is
longer solution times, which with modern computers becomes less of a
problem each day.
It takes considerably more modeling expertise to perform electro-
magnetic transients studies than to perform more common power sys-
tem analyses such as of the power flow or of a short circuit. Therefore,
this task is usually relegated to a few specialists within the utility orga-
nization or to consultants.
While transients programs for electronic circuit analysis may formu-
late the problem in any number of ways, power systems analysts
almost uniformly favor some type of nodal admittance formulation. For
one thing, the system admittance matrix is sparse allowing the use of
very fast and efficient sparsity techniques for solving large problems.
Also, the nodal admittance formulation reflects how most power engi-
neers view the power system, with series and shunt elements con-
nected to buses where the voltage is measured with respect to a single
reference.
To obtain conductances for elements described by differential equa-
tions, transients programs discretize the equations with an appropri-
ate numerical integration formula. The simple trapezoidal rule method
appears to be the most commonly used, but there are also a variety of
Runge-Kutta and other formulations used. Nonlinearities are handled
by iterative solution methods. Some programs include the nonlineari-
ties in the general formulation, while others, such as those that follow
Transient Overvoltages
165
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the EMTP methodology, separate the linear and nonlinear portions of
the circuit to achieve faster solutions. This impairs the ability of the
program to solve some classes of nonlinear problems but is not usually
a significant constraint for most power system problems.
4.9
References
1. Electrical Transmission and Distribution Reference Book, 4th ed., Westinghouse
Electric Corporation, East Pittsburgh, Pa., 1964.
2. Electrical Distribution-System Protection,
3d ed., Cooper Power Systems,
Franksville, Wis., 1990.
3. K. Berger, R. B. Anderson, H. Kroninger, “Parameters of Lightning Flashes, “
Electra, No. 41, July 1975, pp. 23–27.
4. R. Morrison, W. H. Lewis, Grounding and Shielding in Facilities, John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1990.
5. G. L. Goedde, L. J. Kojovic, M. B. Marz, J. J. Woodworth, “Series-Graded Gapped
Arrester Provides Reliable Overvoltage Protection in Distribution Systems,”
Conference Record, 2001 IEEE Power Engineering Society Winter Meeting, Vol. 3,
2001, pp. 1122–1127.
6. Randall A. Stansberry, “Protecting Distribution Circuits: Overhead Shield Wire ver-
sus Lightning Surge Arresters,” Transmission & Distribution, April 1991, pp. 56ff.
7. IEEE Transformers Committee, “Secondary (Low-Side) Surges in Distribution
Transformers,” Proceedings of the 1991 IEEE PES Transmission and Distribution
Conference, Dallas, September 1991, pp. 998–1008.
8. C. W. Plummer, et al., “Reduction in Distribution Transformer Failure Rates and
Nuisance Outages Using Improved Lightning Protection Concepts,” Proceedings of
the 1994 IEEE PES Transmission and Distribution Conference, Chicago, April 1994,
pp. 411–416.
9. G. L. Goedde, L. A. Kojovic, J. J. Woodworth, “Surge Arrester Characteristics That
Provide Reliable Overvoltage Protection in Distribution and Low-Voltage Systems,”
Conference Record, 2000 IEEE Power Engineering Society Summer Meeting, Vol. 4,
2000, pp. 2375–2380.
10. P. Barker, R. Mancao, D. Kvaltine, D. Parrish, “Characteristics of Lightning Surges
Measured at Metal Oxide Distribution Arresters,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, October 1993, pp. 301–310.
11. R. H. Hopkinson, “Better Surge Protection Extends URD Cable Life,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-103, 1984, pp. 2827–2834.
12. G. L. Goedde, R. C Dugan, L. D. Rowe, “Full Scale Lightning Surge Tests of
Distribution Transformers and Secondary Systems,” Proceedings of the 1991 IEEE
PES Transmission and Distribution Conference, Dallas, September 1991, pp.
691–697.
13. S. S. Kershaw, Jr., “Surge Protection for High Voltage Underground Distribution
Circuits,” Conference Record, IEEE Conference on Underground Distribution,
Detroit, September 1971, pp. 370–384.
14. M. B. Marz, T. E. Royster, C. M. Wahlgren, “A Utility’s Approach to the Application
of Scout Arresters for Overvoltage Protection of Underground Distribution Circuits,”
1994 IEEE Transmission and Distribution Conference Record, Chicago, April 1994,
pp. 417–425.
15. H. W. Dommel, “Digital Computer Solution of Electromagnetic Transients in Single
and Multiphase Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems,
Vol. PAS-88, April 1969, pp. 388–399.
16. L. W. Nagel, “SPICE2: A Computer Program to Simulate Semiconductor Circuits,”
Ph. D. thesis, University of California, Berkeley, Electronics Research Laboratory,
No. ERL-M520, May 1975.
166
Chapter Four
Transient Overvoltages
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

167
Fundamentals of Harmonics
A good assumption for most utilities in the United States is that the
sine-wave voltage generated in central power stations is very good. In
most areas, the voltage found on transmission systems typically has
much less than 1.0 percent distortion. However, the distortion
increases closer to the load. At some loads, the current waveform
barely resembles a sine wave. Electronic power converters can chop
the current into seemingly arbitrary waveforms.
While there are a few cases where the distortion is random, most dis-
tortion is periodic, or an integer multiple of the power system funda-
mental frequency. That is, the current waveform is nearly the same
cycle after cycle, changing very slowly, if at all. This has given rise to
the widespread use of the term harmonics to describe distortion of the
waveform. This term must be carefully qualified to make sense. This
chapter and Chap. 6 remove some of the mystery of harmonics in power
systems.
When electronic power converters first became commonplace in the
late 1970s, many utility engineers became quite concerned about the
ability of the power system to accommodate the harmonic distortion.
Many dire predictions were made about the fate of power systems if
these devices were permitted to exist. While some of these concerns
were probably overstated, the field of power quality analysis owes a
great debt of gratitude to these people because their concern over this
“new” problem of harmonics sparked the research that has eventually
led to much of the knowledge about all aspects of power quality.
To some, harmonic distortion is still the most significant power qual-
ity problem. It is not hard to understand how an engineer faced with a
difficult harmonics problem can come to hold that opinion. Harmonics
problems counter many of the conventional rules of power system
Chapter5
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

design and operation that consider only the fundamental frequency.
Therefore, the engineer is faced with unfamiliar phenomena that
require unfamiliar tools to analyze and unfamiliar equipment to solve.
Although harmonic problems can be difficult, they are not actually very
numerous on utility systems. Only a few percent of utility distribution
feeders in the United States have a sufficiently severe harmonics prob-
lem to require attention.
In contrast, voltage sags and interruptions are nearly universal to
every feeder and represent the most numerous and significant power
quality deviations. The end-user sector suffers more from harmonic
problems than does the utility sector. Industrial users with adjustable-
speed drives, arc furnaces, induction furnaces, and the like are much
more susceptible to problems stemming from harmonic distortion.
Harmonic distortion is not a new phenomenon on power systems.
Concern over distortion has ebbed and flowed a number of times dur-
ing the history of ac electric power systems. Scanning the technical lit-
erature of the 1930s and 1940s, one will notice many articles on the
subject. At that time the primary sources were the transformers and
the primary problem was inductive interference with open-wire tele-
phone systems. The forerunners of modern arc lighting were being
introduced and were causing quite a stir because of their harmonic con-
tent—not unlike the stir caused by electronic power converters in more
recent times.
Fortunately, if the system is properly sized to handle the power
demands of the load, there is a low probability that harmonics will
cause a problem with the power system, although they may cause prob-
lems with telecommunications. The power system problems arise most
frequently when the capacitance in the system results in resonance at
a critical harmonic frequency that dramatically increases the distor-
tion above normal amounts. While these problems occur on utility sys-
tems, the most severe cases are usually found in industrial power
systems because of the higher degree of resonance achieved.
5.1
Harmonic Distortion
Harmonic distortion is caused by nonlinear devices in the power sys-
tem. A nonlinear device is one in which the current is not proportional
to the applied voltage. Figure 5.1 illustrates this concept by the case of
a sinusoidal voltage applied to a simple nonlinear resistor in which the
voltage and current vary according to the curve shown. While the
applied voltage is perfectly sinusoidal, the resulting current is dis-
torted. Increasing the voltage by a few percent may cause the current
to double and take on a different waveshape. This is the source of most
harmonic distortion in a power system.
168
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Figure 5.2 illustrates that any periodic, distorted waveform can be
expressed as a sum of sinusoids. When a waveform is identical from one
cycle to the next, it can be represented as a sum of pure sine waves in
which the frequency of each sinusoid is an integer multiple of the fun-
damental frequency of the distorted wave. This multiple is called a har-
monic of the fundamental, hence the name of this subject matter. The
sum of sinusoids is referred to as a Fourier series, named after the great
mathematician who discovered the concept.
Because of the above property, the Fourier series concept is univer-
sally applied in analyzing harmonic problems. The system can now be
analyzed separately at each harmonic. In addition, finding the system
response of a sinusoid of each harmonic individually is much more
straightforward compared to that with the entire distorted waveforms.
The outputs at each frequency are then combined to form a new Fourier
series, from which the output waveform may be computed, if desired.
Often, only the magnitudes of the harmonics are of interest.
When both the positive and negative half cycles of a waveform have
identical shapes, the Fourier series contains only odd harmonics. This
offers a further simplification for most power system studies because
most common harmonic-producing devices look the same to both polari-
ties. In fact, the presence of even harmonics is often a clue that there is
something wrong—either with the load equipment or with the transducer
used to make the measurement. There are notable exceptions to this such
as half-wave rectifiers and arc furnaces when the arc is random.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
169
V(t)
I(t)
V
I
Nonlinear Resistor
Figure 5.1
Current distortion caused by nonlinear resistance.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

·
+
+
+
+
+
+
·
·
+
60 Hz
(h = 1)
300 Hz
(h = 5)
420 Hz
(h = 7)
540 Hz
(h = 9)
660 Hz
(h = 11)
780 Hz
(h = 13)
180 Hz
(h = 3)
Figure 5.2
Fourier series representation of a distorted waveform.
170
Chapter Five
Usually, the higher-order harmonics (above the range of the 25th to
50th, depending on the system) are negligible for power system
analysis. While they may cause interference with low-power elec-
tronic devices, they are usually not damaging to the power system. It
is also difficult to collect sufficiently accurate data to model power
systems at these frequencies. A common exception to this occurs when
there are system resonances in the range of frequencies. These reso-
nances can be excited by notching or switching transients in elec-
tronic power converters. This causes voltage waveforms with multiple
zero crossings which disrupt timing circuits. These resonances gener-
ally occur on systems with underground cable but no power factor cor-
rection capacitors.
If the power system is depicted as series and shunt elements, as is
the conventional practice, the vast majority of the nonlinearities in the
system are found in shunt elements (i.e., loads). The series impedance
of the power delivery system (i.e., the short-circuit impedance between
the source and the load) is remarkably linear. In transformers, also, the
source of harmonics is the shunt branch (magnetizing impedance) of
the common “T” model; the leakage impedance is linear. Thus, the main
sources of harmonic distortion will ultimately be end-user loads. This
is not to say that all end users who experience harmonic distortion will
themselves have significant sources of harmonics, but that the har-
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Fundamentals of Harmonics
171
monic distortion generally originates with some end-user’s load or com-
bination of loads.
5.2
Voltage versus Current Distortion
The word harmonics is often used by itself without further qualifica-
tion. For example, it is common to hear that an adjustable-speed drive
or an induction furnace can’t operate properly because of harmonics.
What does that mean? Generally, it could mean one of the following
three things:
1. The harmonic voltages are too great (the voltage too distorted) for
the control to properly determine firing angles.
2. The harmonic currents are too great for the capacity of some device
in the power supply system such as a transformer, and the machine
must be operated at a lower than rated power.
3. The harmonic voltages are too great because the harmonic currents
produced by the device are too great for the given system condition.
As suggested by this list, there are separate causes and effects for volt-
ages and currents as well as some relationship between them. Thus,
the term harmonics by itself is inadequate to definitively describe a
problem.
Nonlinear loads appear to be sources of harmonic current in shunt
with and injecting harmonic currents into the power system. For nearly
all analyses, it is sufficient to treat these harmonic-producing loads
simply as current sources. There are exceptions to this as will be
described later.
As Fig. 5.3 shows, voltage distortion is the result of distorted cur-
rents passing through the linear, series impedance of the power deliv-
ery system, although, assuming that the source bus is ultimately a
pure sinusoid, there is a nonlinear load that draws a distorted current.
The harmonic currents passing through the impedance of the system
Pure
Sinusoid
Distorted Load
Current
Distorted Voltage
+
–
(Voltage Drop)
Figure 5.3
Harmonic currents flowing through the system impedance result in
harmonic voltages at the load.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

cause a voltage drop for each harmonic. This results in voltage har-
monics appearing at the load bus. The amount of voltage distortion
depends on the impedance and the current. Assuming the load bus dis-
tortion stays within reasonable limits (e.g., less than 5 percent), the
amount of harmonic current produced by the load is generally constant.
While the load current harmonics ultimately cause the voltage dis-
tortion, it should be noted that load has no control over the voltage dis-
tortion. The same load put in two different locations on the power
system will result in two different voltage distortion values.
Recognition of this fact is the basis for the division of responsibilities
for harmonic control that are found in standards such as IEEE
Standard 519-1992, Recommended Practices and Requirements for
Harmonic Control in Electrical Power Systems:
1. The control over the amount of harmonic current injected into the
system takes place at the end-use application.
2. Assuming the harmonic current injection is within reasonable lim-
its, the control over the voltage distortion is exercised by the entity
having control over the system impedance, which is often the utility.
One must be careful when describing harmonic phenomena to under-
stand that there are distinct differences between the causes and effects
of harmonic voltages and currents. The use of the term harmonics
should be qualified accordingly. By popular convention in the power
industry, the majority of times when the term is used by itself to refer
to the load apparatus, the speaker is referring to the harmonic cur-
rents. When referring to the utility system, the voltages are generally
the subject. To be safe, make a habit of asking for clarification.
5.3
Harmonics versus Transients
Harmonic distortion is blamed for many power quality disturbances
that are actually transients. A measurement of the event may show a
distorted 
waveform 
with 
obvious 
high-frequency 
components.
Although transient disturbances contain high-frequency components,
transients and harmonics are distinctly different phenomena and are
analyzed differently. Transient waveforms exhibit the high frequencies
only briefly after there has been an abrupt change in the power system.
The frequencies are not necessarily harmonics; they are the natural
frequencies of the system at the time of the switching operation. These
frequencies have no relation to the system fundamental frequency.
Harmonics, by definition, occur in the steady state and are integer
multiples of the fundamental frequency. The waveform distortion that
produces the harmonics is present continually, or at least for several
172
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

seconds. Transients are usually dissipated within a few cycles. Trans-
ients are associated with changes in the system such as switching of a
capacitor bank. Harmonics are associated with the continuing opera-
tion of a load.
One case in which the distinction is blurred is transformer energiza-
tion. This is a transient event but can produce considerable waveform
distortion for many seconds and has been known to excite system res-
onances.
5.4
Power System Quantities under
Nonsinusoidal Conditions
Traditional power system quantities such as rms, power (reactive,
active, apparent), power factor, and phase sequences are defined for the
fundamental frequency context in a pure sinusoidal condition. In the
presence of harmonic distortion the power system no longer operates in
a sinusoidal condition, and unfortunately many of the simplifications
power engineers use for the fundamental frequency analysis do not
apply.  
5.4.1
Active, reactive, and apparent power
There are three standard quantities associated with power:
■Apparent power S [voltampere (VA)].
The product of the rms voltage
and current.
■Active power P [watt (W)].
The average rate of delivery of energy.
■Reactive power Q [voltampere-reactive] (var)].
The portion of the
apparent power that is out of phase, or in quadrature, with the active
power.
The apparent power S applies to both sinusoidal and nonsinusoidal
conditions. The apparent power can be written as follows:
S  Vrms  Irms
(5.1)
where Vrms and Irms are the rms values of the voltage and current. In a
sinusoidal condition both the voltage and current waveforms contain
only the fundamental frequency component; thus the rms values can be
expressed simply as
Vrms 
V1
and
Irms 
I1
(5.2)
1

2
1

2
Fundamentals of Harmonics
173
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

where V1 and I1 are the amplitude of voltage and current waveforms,
respectively. The subscript “1” denotes quantities in the fundamental
frequency. In a nonsinusoidal condition a harmonically distorted wave-
form is made up of sinusoids of harmonic frequencies with different
amplitudes as shown in Fig. 5.2. The rms values of the waveforms are
computed as the square root of the sum of rms squares of all individual
components, i.e.,
Vrms 
hmax
h  1
Vh
2

V1
2 
V2
2 
V3
2 
…  V
2
hmax

(5.3)
Irms 
hmax
h  1
Ih
2

I1
2  I
2
2  I3
2  …
  I2
hm
ax
(5.4)
where Vh and Ih are the amplitude of a waveform at the harmonic com-
ponent h. In the sinusoidal condition, harmonic components of Vh and
Ih are all zero, and only V1 and I1 remain. Equations (5.3) and (5.4) sim-
plify to Eq. (5.2).
The active power P is also commonly referred to as the average
power, real power, or true power. It represents useful power expended
by loads to perform real work, i.e., to convert electric energy to other
forms of energy. Real work performed by an incandescent light bulb is
to convert electric energy into light and heat. In electric power, real
work is performed for the portion of the current that is in phase with
the voltage. No real work will result from the portion where the current
is not in phase with the voltage. The active power is the rate at which
energy is expended, dissipated, or consumed by the load and is mea-
sured in units of watts. P can be computed by averaging the product of
the instantaneous voltage and current, i.e.,
P 

T
0 v(t) i(t) dt
(5.5)
Equation (5.5) is valid for both sinusoidal and nonsinusoidal condi-
tions. For the sinusoidal condition, P resolves to the familiar form,
P 
cos 1  V1rms I1rms cos 1  S cos 1
(5.6)
where 1 is the phase angle between voltage and current at the funda-
mental frequency. Equation (5.6) indicates that the average active
V1I1

2
1
T
1

2
1

2
1

2
1

2
174
Chapter Five
h
h
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

power is a function only of the fundamental frequency quantities. In
the nonsinusoidal case, the computation of the active power must
include contributions from all harmonic components; thus it is the sum
of active power at each harmonic. Furthermore, because the voltage
distortion is generally very low on power systems (less than 5 percent),
Eq. (5.6) is a good approximation regardless of how distorted the cur-
rent is. This approximation cannot be applied when computing the
apparent and reactive power. These two quantities are greatly influ-
enced by the distortion. The apparent power S is a measure of the
potential impact of the load on the thermal capability of the system. It
is proportional to the rms of the distorted current, and its computation
is straightforward, although slightly more complicated than the sinu-
soidal case. Also, many current probes can now directly report the true
rms value of a distorted waveform.
The reactive power is a type of power that does no real work and is
generally associated with reactive elements (inductors and capacitors).
For example, the inductance of a load such as a motor causes the load
current to lag behind the voltage. Power appearing across the induc-
tance sloshes back and forth between the inductance itself and the
power system source, producing no net work. For this reason it is called
imaginary or reactive power since no power is dissipated or expended.
It is expressed in units of vars. In the sinusoidal case, the reactive
power is simply defined as
Q  S sin 1 
sin 1  V1rms I1rms sin 1
(5.7)
which is the portion of power in quadrature with the active power
shown in Eq. (5.6). Figure 5.4 summarizes the relationship between P,
Q, and S in sinusoidal condition.
There is some disagreement among harmonics analysts on how to
define Q in the presence of harmonic distortion. If it were not for the
fact that many utilities measure Q and compute demand billing from
the power factor computed by Q, it might be a moot point. It is more
important to determine P and S; P defines how much active power is
being consumed, while S defines the capacity of the power system
required to deliver P. Q is not actually very useful by itself. However,
Q1, the traditional reactive power component at fundamental fre-
quency, may be used to size shunt capacitors.
The reactive power when distortion is present has another interest-
ing peculiarity. In fact, it may not be appropriate to call it reactive
power. The concept of var flow in the power system is deeply ingrained
in the minds of most power engineers. What many do not realize is
that this concept is valid only in the sinusoidal steady state. When dis-
V1I1

2
Fundamentals of Harmonics
175
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tortion is present, the component of S that remains after P is taken out
is not conserved—that is, it does not sum to zero at a node. Power
quantities are presumed to flow around the system in a conservative
manner.
This does not imply that P is not conserved or that current is not
conserved because the conservation of energy and Kirchoff’s current
laws are still applicable for any waveform. The reactive components
actually sum in quadrature (square root of the sum of the squares).
This has prompted some analysts to propose that Q be used to denote
the reactive components that are conserved and introduce a new quan-
tity for the components that are not. Many call this quantity D, for dis-
tortion power or, simply, distortion voltamperes. It has units of
voltamperes, but it may not be strictly appropriate to refer to this
quantity as power, because it does not flow through the system as
power is assumed to do. In this concept, Q consists of the sum of the
traditional reactive power values at each frequency. D represents all
cross products of voltage and current at different frequencies, which
yield no average power. P, Q, D, and S are related as follows, using the
definitions for S and P previously given in Eqs. (5.1) and (5.5) as a
starting point:
S  P2  Q
2  D2

Q  
k
VkIk sin k
(5.8)
Therefore, D can be determined after S, P, and Q by
D  S2  P
2  Q2

(5.9)
Some prefer to use a three-dimensional vector chart to demonstrate the
relationships of the components as shown in Fig. 5.5. P and Q con-
176
Chapter Five
S
P
Q
Figure 5.4
Relationship between
P, Q, and S in sinusoidal condition.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tribute the traditional sinusoidal components to S, while D represents
the additional contribution to the apparent power by the harmonics.
5.4.2
Power factor: displacement and true
Power factor (PF) is a ratio of useful power to perform real work (active
power) to the power supplied by a utility (apparent power), i.e.,
PF 
(5.10)
In other words, the power factor ratio measures the percentage of power
expended for its intended use. Power factor ranges from zero to unity. A
load with a power factor of 0.9 lagging denotes that the load can effectively
expend 90 percent of the apparent power supplied (voltamperes) and con-
vert it to perform useful work (watts). The term lagging denotes that the
fundamental current lags behind the fundamental voltage by 25.84°.
In the sinusoidal case there is only one phase angle between the volt-
age and the current (since only the fundamental frequency is present;
the power factor can be computed as the cosine of the phase angle and
is commonly referred as the displacement power factor:
PF 
 cos 
(5.11)
In the nonsinusoidal case the power factor cannot be defined as the
cosine of the phase angle as in Eq. (5.11). The power factor that takes into
account the contribution from all active power, including both funda-
mental and harmonic frequencies, is known as the true power factor. The
true power factor is simply the ratio of total active power for all frequen-
cies to the apparent power delivered by the utility as shown in Eq. (5.10).
Power quality monitoring instruments now commonly report both
displacement and true power factors. Many devices such as switch-
P
S
P
S
Fundamentals of Harmonics
177
Q
P
D
S
Figure 5.5
Relationship of com-
ponents of the apparent power.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

mode power supplies and PWM adjustable-speed drives have a near-
unity displacement power factor, but the true power factor may be 0.5
to 0.6. An ac-side capacitor will do little to improve the true power fac-
tor in this case because Q1 is zero. In fact, if it results in resonance, the
distortion may increase, causing the power factor to degrade. The true
power factor indicates how large the power delivery system must be
built to supply a given load. In this example, using only the displace-
ment power factor would give a false sense of security that all is well.
The bottom line is that distortion results in additional current com-
ponents flowing in the system that do not yield any net energy except
that they cause losses in the power system elements they pass through.
This requires the system to be built to a slightly larger capacity to
deliver the power to the load than if no distortion were present.
5.4.3
Harmonic phase sequences
Power engineers have traditionally used symmetrical components to
help describe three-phase system behavior. The three-phase system is
transformed into three single-phase systems that are much simpler to
analyze. The method of symmetrical components can be employed for
analysis of the system’s response to harmonic currents provided care is
taken not to violate the fundamental assumptions of the method.
The method allows any unbalanced set of phase currents (or volt-
ages) to be transformed into three balanced sets. The positive-sequence
set contains three sinusoids displaced 120° from each other, with the
normal A-B-C phase rotation (e.g., 0°, 120°, 120°). The sinusoids of
the negative-sequence set are also displaced 120°, but have opposite
phase rotation (A-C-B, e.g., 0°, 120°, 120°). The sinusoids of the zero
sequence are in phase with each other (e.g., 0°, 0°, 0°).
In a perfect balanced three-phase system, the harmonic phase
sequence can be determined by multiplying the harmonic number h with
the normal positive-sequence phase rotation. For example, for the second
harmonic, h  2, we get 2  (0, 120°, 120°) or (0°, 120°, 120°), which
is the negative sequence. For the third harmonic, h  3, we get 3  (0°,
120°, 120°) or (0°, 0°, 0°), which is the zero sequence. Phase sequences
for all other harmonic orders can be determined in the same fashion.
Since a distorted waveform in power systems contains only odd-harmonic
components (see Sec. 5.1), only odd-harmonic phase sequence rotations
are summarized here:
■Harmonics of order h  1, 7, 13,… are generally positive sequence.
■Harmonics of order h  5, 11, 17,… are generally negative sequence.
■Triplens (h  3, 9, 15,…) are generally zero sequence.
178
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Impacts of sequence harmonics on various power system components
are detailed in Sec. 5.10.
5.4.4
Triplen harmonics
As previously mentioned, triplen harmonics are the odd multiples of
the third harmonic (h  3, 9, 15, 21,…). They deserve special consider-
ation because the system response is often considerably different for
triplens than for the rest of the harmonics. Triplens become an impor-
tant issue for grounded-wye systems with current flowing on the neu-
tral. Two typical problems are overloading the neutral and telephone
interference. One also hears occasionally of devices that misoperate
because the line-to-neutral voltage is badly distorted by the triplen
harmonic voltage drop in the neutral conductor.
For the system with perfectly balanced single-phase loads illustrated
in Fig. 5.6, an assumption is made that fundamental and third-har-
monic components are present. Summing the currents at node N, the
fundamental current components in the neutral are found to be zero,
but the third-harmonic components are 3 times those of the phase cur-
rents because they naturally coincide in phase and time.
Transformer winding connections have a significant impact on the
flow of triplen harmonic currents from single-phase nonlinear loads.
Two cases are shown in Fig. 5.7. In the wye-delta transformer (top), the
triplen harmonic currents are shown entering the wye side. Since they
are in phase, they add in the neutral. The delta winding provides
ampere-turn balance so that they can flow, but they remain trapped in
the delta and do not show up in the line currents on the delta side.
When the currents are balanced, the triplen harmonic currents behave
exactly as zero-sequence currents, which is precisely what they are.
This type of transformer connection is the most common employed in
utility distribution substations with the delta winding connected to the
transmission feed.
Using grounded-wye windings on both sides of the transformer (bot-
tom) allows balanced triplens to flow from the low-voltage system to
the high-voltage system unimpeded. They will be present in equal pro-
portion on both sides. Many loads in the United States are served in
this fashion.
Some important implications of this related to power quality analy-
sis are
1. Transformers, particularly the neutral connections, are susceptible
to overheating when serving single-phase loads on the wye side that
have high third-harmonic content.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
179
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2. Measuring the current on the delta side of a transformer will not
show the triplens and, therefore, not give a true idea of the heating
the transformer is being subjected to.
3. The flow of triplen harmonic currents can be interrupted by the
appropriate isolation transformer connection.
Removing the neutral connection in one or both wye windings blocks
the flow of triplen harmonic current. There is no place for ampere-turn
balance. Likewise, a delta winding blocks the flow from the line. One
should note that three-legged core transformers behave as if they have
a “phantom” delta tertiary winding. Therefore, a wye-wye connection
with only one neutral point grounded will still be able to conduct the
triplen harmonics from that side.
These rules about triplen harmonic current flow in transformers
apply only to balanced loading conditions. When the phases are not bal-
anced, currents of normal triplen harmonic frequencies may very well
show up where they are not expected. The normal mode for triplen har-
monics is to be zero sequence. During imbalances, triplen harmonics
may have positive or negative sequence components, too.
One notable case of this is a three-phase arc furnace. The furnace is
nearly always fed by a delta-delta connected transformer to block the
flow of the zero sequence currents as shown in Fig. 5.8. Thinking that
third harmonics are synonymous with zero sequence, many engineers
are surprised to find substantial third-harmonic current present in
180
Chapter Five
balanced fundamental currents sum to 0,
but balanced third-harmonic currents coincide
neutral current contains no
fundamental, but is 300% of
third-harmonic phase current 
A
B
C
N
Figure 5.6
High neutral currents in circuits serving single-phase nonlinear loads.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

large magnitudes in the line current. However, during scrap meltdown,
the furnace will frequently operate in an unbalanced mode with only
two electrodes carrying current. Large third-harmonic currents can
then freely circulate in these two phases just as in a single-phase cir-
cuit. However, they are not zero-sequence currents. The third-har-
monic currents have equal amounts of positive- and negative-sequence
currents.
But to the extent that the system is mostly balanced, triplens mostly
behave in the manner described.
5.5
Harmonic Indices
The two most commonly used indices for measuring the harmonic con-
tent of a waveform are the total harmonic distortion and the total
demand distortion. Both are measures of the effective value of a wave-
form and may be applied to either voltage or current.
5.5.1
Total harmonic distortion
The THD is a measure of the effective value of the harmonic compo-
nents of a distorted waveform. That is, it is the potential heating value
of the harmonics relative to the fundamental. This index can be calcu-
lated for either voltage or current:
Fundamentals of Harmonics
181
Figure 5.7
Flow of third-har-
monic current in three-phase
transformers.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

THD =
(5.12)
where Mh is the rms value of harmonic component h of the quantity M.
The rms value of a distorted waveform is the square root of the sum
of the squares as shown in Eqs. (5.3) and (5.4). The THD is related to
the rms value of the waveform as follows:
RMS  
i 
hmax
h  1
M

h
2
  M1 1  T
HD2

(5.13)
The THD is a very useful quantity for many applications, but its limi-
tations must be realized. It can provide a good idea of how much extra
heat will be realized when a distorted voltage is applied across a resis-
tive load. Likewise, it can give an indication of the additional losses
caused by the current flowing through a conductor. However, it is not
a good indicator of the voltage stress within a capacitor because that
is related to the peak value of the voltage waveform, not its heating
value.

1 
hmax
h  1
M

h
2

M1
182
Chapter Five
Arc
Figure 5.8 Arc furnace operation in an unbalanced mode allows
triplen harmonics to reach the power system despite a delta- 
connected transformer.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The THD index is most often used to describe voltage harmonic dis-
tortion. Harmonic voltages are almost always referenced to the funda-
mental value of the waveform at the time of the sample. Because
fundamental voltage varies by only a few percent, the voltage THD is
nearly always a meaningful number.
Variations in the THD over a period of time often follow a distinct
pattern representing nonlinear load activities in the system. Figure
5.9 shows the voltage THD variation over a 1-week period where a
daily cyclical pattern is obvious. The voltage THD shown in Fig. 5.9
was taken at a 13.2-kV distribution substation supplying a residential
load. High-voltage THD occurs at night and during the early morning
hours since the nonlinear loads are relatively high compared to the
amount of linear load during these hours. A 1-week observation period
is often required to come up with a meaningful THD pattern since it is
usually the shortest period to obtain representative and reproducible
measurement results.
5.5.2
Total demand distortion
Current distortion levels can be characterized by a THD value, as has
been described, but this can often be misleading. A small current may
Fundamentals of Harmonics
183
0%
2%
3%
4%
0%
2%
3%
4%
VTHD
Mon
1%
Tue
Wed
Thurs
Fri
Sat
Sun
Figure 5.9
Variation of the voltage THD over a 1-week period.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

have a high THD but not be a significant threat to the system. For
example, many adjustable-speed drives will exhibit high THD values
for the input current when they are operating at very light loads. This
is not necessarily a significant concern because the magnitude of har-
monic current is low, even though its relative current distortion is high.
Some analysts have attempted to avoid this difficulty by referring
THD to the fundamental of the peak demand load current rather than
the fundamental of the present sample. This is called total demand dis-
tortion and serves as the basis for the guidelines in IEEE Standard
519-1992, Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic
Control in Electrical Power Systems. It is defined as follows:
TDD 
(5.14)
IL is the peak, or maximum, demand load current at the fundamental
frequency component measured at the point of common coupling
(PCC). There are two ways to measure IL. With a load already in the
system, it can be calculated as the average of the maximum demand
current for the preceding 12 months. The calculation can simply be
done by averaging the 12-month peak demand readings. For a new
facility, IL has to be estimated based on the predicted load profiles.
5.6
Harmonic Sources from 
Commercial Loads
Commercial facilities such as office complexes, department stores, hos-
pitals, and Internet data centers are dominated with high-efficiency flu-
orescent lighting with electronic ballasts, adjustable-speed drives for
the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) loads, elevator
drives, and sensitive electronic equipment supplied by single-phase
switch-mode power supplies. Commercial loads are characterized by a
large number of small harmonic-producing loads. Depending on the
diversity of the different load types, these small harmonic currents may
add in phase or cancel each other. The voltage distortion levels depend
on both the circuit impedances and the overall harmonic current distor-
tion. Since power factor correction capacitors are not typically used in
commercial facilities, the circuit impedance is dominated by the service
entrance transformers and conductor impedances. Therefore, the volt-
age distortion can be estimated simply by multiplying the current by the

i 
hmax
h  2
I

h
2

IL
184
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

impedance adjusted for frequency. Characteristics of typical nonlinear
commercial loads are detailed in the following sections.
5.6.1
Single-phase power supplies
Electronic power converter loads with their capacity for producing har-
monic currents now constitute the most important class of nonlinear
loads in the power system. Advances in semiconductor device technol-
ogy have fueled a revolution in power electronics over the past decade,
and there is every indication that this trend will continue. Equipment
includes adjustable-speed motor drives, electronic power supplies, dc
motor drives, battery chargers, electronic ballasts, and many other rec-
tifier and inverter applications.
A major concern in commercial buildings is that power supplies for
single-phase electronic equipment will produce too much harmonic cur-
rent for the wiring. DC power for modern electronic and microproces-
sor-based office equipment is commonly derived from single-phase
full-wave diode bridge rectifiers. The percentage of load that contains
electronic power supplies is increasing at a dramatic pace, with the
increased utilization of personal computers in every commercial sector.
There are two common types of single-phase power supplies. Older
technologies use ac-side voltage control methods, such as transformers,
to reduce voltages to the level required for the dc bus. The inductance
of the transformer provides a beneficial side effect by smoothing the
input current waveform, reducing harmonic content. Newer-technol-
ogy switch-mode power supplies (see Fig. 5.10) use dc-to-dc conversion
techniques to achieve a smooth dc output with small, lightweight com-
ponents. The input diode bridge is directly connected to the ac line,
eliminating the transformer. This results in a coarsely regulated dc
voltage on the capacitor. This direct current is then converted back to
alternating current at a very high frequency by the switcher and sub-
sequently rectified again. Personal computers, printers, copiers, and
most other single-phase electronic equipment now almost universally
employ switch-mode power supplies. The key advantages are the light
weight, compact size, efficient operation, and lack of need for a trans-
former. Switch-mode power supplies can usually tolerate large varia-
tions in input voltage.
Because there is no large ac-side inductance, the input current to the
power supply comes in very short pulses as the capacitor C1 regains its
charge on each half cycle. Figure 5.11 illustrates the current waveform
and spectrum for an entire circuit supplying a variety of electronic
equipment with switch-mode power supplies.
A distinctive characteristic of switch-mode power supplies is a very
high third-harmonic content in the current. Since third-harmonic current
Fundamentals of Harmonics
185
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

components are additive in the neutral of a three-phase system, the
increasing application of switch-mode power supplies causes concern for
overloading of neutral conductors, especially in older buildings where an
undersized neutral may have been installed. There is also a concern for
transformer overheating due to a combination of harmonic content of the
current, stray flux, and high neutral currents.
5.6.2
Fluorescent lighting
Lighting typically accounts for 40 to 60 percent of a commercial build-
ing load. According to the 1995 Commercial Buildings Energy
Consumption study conducted by the U.S. Energy Information
Administration, fluorescent lighting was used on 77 percent of com-
mercial floor spaces, while only 14 percent of the spaces used incan-
descent lighting.1 Fluorescent lights are a popular choice for energy
savings.
Fluorescent lights are discharge lamps; thus they require a ballast to
provide a high initial voltage to initiate the discharge for the electric
current to flow between two electrodes in the fluorescent tube. Once the
discharge is established, the voltage decreases as the arc current
increases. It is essentially a short circuit between the two electrodes,
and the ballast has to quickly reduce the current to a level to maintain
the specified lumen output. Thus, a ballast is also a current-limiting
device in lighting applications.
There are two types of ballasts, magnetic and electronic. A standard
magnetic ballast is simply made up of an iron-core transformer with a
capacitor encased in an insulating material. A single magnetic ballast
can drive one or two fluorescent lamps, and it operates at the line fun-
damental frequency, i.e., 50 or 60 Hz. The iron-core magnetic ballast
contributes additional heat losses, which makes it inefficient compared
to an electronic ballast.
An electronic ballast employs a switch-mode–type power supply to
convert the incoming fundamental frequency voltage to a much higher
frequency voltage typically in the range of 25 to 40 kHz. This high fre-
quency has two advantages. First, a small inductor is sufficient to limit
186
Chapter Five
DC
Switcher
and
Controls
C1
L1
120 VAC
Figure 5.10
Switch-mode power supply.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the arc current. Second, the high frequency eliminates or greatly
reduces the 100- or 120-Hz flicker associated with an iron-core mag-
netic ballast. A single electronic ballast typically can drive up to four
fluorescent lamps.
Standard magnetic ballasts are usually rather benign sources of
additional harmonics themselves since the main harmonic distortion
comes from the behavior of the arc. Figure 5.12 shows a measured flu-
orescent lamp current and harmonic spectrum. The current THD is a
moderate 15 percent. As a comparison, electronic ballasts, which
employ switch-mode power supplies, can produce double or triple the
standard magnetic ballast harmonic output. Figure 5.13 shows a fluo-
rescent lamp with an electronic ballast that has a current THD of 144.
Other electronic ballasts have been specifically designed to minimize
harmonics and may actually produce less harmonic distortion than the
normal magnetic ballast-lamp combination. Electronic ballasts typi-
cally produce current THDs in the range of between 10 and 32 percent.
A current THD greater than 32 percent is considered excessive accord-
ing to ANSI C82.11-1993, High-Frequency Fluorescent Lamp Ballasts.
Most electronic ballasts are equipped with passive filtering to reduce
the input current harmonic distortion to less than 20 percent.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
187
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
–200
–100
0
100
200
Time (ms)
(a)
Current (A)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
0
20
40
60
Frequency (Hz)
(b)
Current (A)
Figure 5.11
SMPS current and harmonic spectrum.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Since fluorescent lamps are a significant source of harmonics in com-
mercial buildings, they are usually distributed among the phases in a
nearly balanced manner. With a delta-connected supply transformer,
this reduces the amount of triplen harmonic currents flowing onto the
power supply system. However, it should be noted that the common
wye-wye supply transformers will not impede the flow of triplen har-
monics regardless of how well balanced the phases are.
5.6.3
Adjustable-speed drives for HVAC
and elevators
Common applications of adjustable-speed drives (ASDs) in commercial
loads can be found in elevator motors and in pumps and fans in HVAC
systems. An ASD consists of an electronic power converter that con-
verts ac voltage and frequency into variable voltage and frequency. The
variable voltage and frequency allows the ASD to control motor speed
188
Chapter Five
0
10
20
30
40
–0.3
–0.2
–0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Current (A)
Current (A)
Time (ms)
(a)
0
 240
 480
 720
 960
1200
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
Frequency (Hz)
(b)
Figure 5.12
Fluorescent lamp with (a) magnetic ballast current wave-
form and (b) its harmonic spectrum.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

to match the application requirement such as slowing a pump or fan.
ASDs also find many applications in industrial loads. 
5.7
Harmonic Sources from 
Industrial Loads
Modern industrial facilities are characterized by the widespread appli-
cation of nonlinear loads. These loads can make up a significant portion
of the total facility loads and inject harmonic currents into the power
system, causing harmonic distortion in the voltage. This harmonic
problem is compounded by the fact that these nonlinear loads have a
relatively low power factor. Industrial facilities often utilize capacitor
banks to improve the power factor to avoid penalty charges. The appli-
cation of power factor correction capacitors can potentially magnify
harmonic currents from the nonlinear loads, giving rise to resonance
conditions within the facility. The highest voltage distortion level usu-
ally occurs at the facility’s low-voltage bus where the capacitors are
Fundamentals of Harmonics
189
–0.4
–0.2
 0.0
 0.2
 0.4
10
20
30
40
0
Time (ms)
(a)
   0
 600
1200
1800
2400
3000
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Frequency (Hz)
(b)
Current (A)
Current (A)
Figure 5.13
Fluorescent lamp with (a) electronic ballast current wave-
form and (b) its harmonic spectrum.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

applied. Resonance conditions cause motor and transformer overheat-
ing, and misoperation of sensitive electronic equipment.
Nonlinear industrial loads can generally be grouped into three cate-
gories: three-phase power converters, arcing devices, and saturable
devices. Sections 5.7.1 to 5.7.3 detail the industrial load characteris-
tics.
5.7.1
Three-phase power converters
Three-phase electronic power converters differ from single-phase con-
verters mainly because they do not generate third-harmonic currents.
This is a great advantage because the third-harmonic current is the
largest component of harmonics. However, they can still be significant
sources of harmonics at their characteristic frequencies, as shown in
Fig. 5.14. This is a typical current source type of adjustable-speed
drive. The harmonic spectrum given in Fig. 5.14 would also be typical
of a dc motor drive input current. Voltage source inverter drives (such
as PWM-type drives) can have much higher distortion levels as shown
in Fig. 5.15.
190
Chapter Five
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
–200
–100
0
100
200
Time (ms)
(a)
Current (A)
Current (A)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
0
20
40
60
80
100
 Frequency (Hz)
(b)
Figure 5.14
Current and harmonic spectrum for CSI-type ASD.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The input to the PWM drive is generally designed like a three-phase
version of the switch-mode power supply in computers. The rectifier
feeds directly from the ac bus to a large capacitor on the dc bus. With
little intentional inductance, the capacitor is charged in very short
pulses, creating the distinctive “rabbit ear” ac-side current waveform
with very high distortion. Whereas the switch-mode power supplies are
generally for very small loads, PWM drives are now being applied for
loads up to 500 horsepower (hp). This is a justifiable cause for concern
from power engineers.
DC drives.
Rectification is the only step required for dc drives.
Therefore, they have the advantage of relatively simple control sys-
tems. Compared with ac drive systems, the dc drive offers a wider
speed range and higher starting torque. However, purchase and main-
tenance costs for dc motors are high, while the cost of power electronic
devices has been dropping year after year. Thus, economic considera-
tions limit use of the dc drive to applications that require the speed and
torque characteristics of the dc motor.
Most dc drives use the six-pulse rectifier shown in Fig. 5.16. Large
drives may employ a 12-pulse rectifier. This reduces thyristor current
Fundamentals of Harmonics
191
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
–400
–200
0
200
400
Time (ms)
(a)
Current (A)
Current (A)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
0
20
40
60
80
100
 Frequency (Hz)
(b)
Figure 5.15
Current and harmonic spectrum for PWM-type ASD.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

duties and reduces some of the larger ac current harmonics. The two
largest harmonic currents for the six-pulse drive are the fifth and sev-
enth. They are also the most troublesome in terms of system response.
A 12-pulse rectifier in this application can be expected to eliminate
about 90 percent of the fifth and seventh harmonics, depending on sys-
tem imbalances. The disadvantages of the 12-pulse drive are that there
is more cost in electronics and another transformer is generally
required.
AC drives.
In ac drives, the rectifier output is inverted to produce a
variable-frequency ac voltage for the motor. Inverters are classified as
voltage source inverters (VSIs) or current source inverters (CSIs). A
VSI requires a constant dc (i.e., low-ripple) voltage input to the inverter
stage. This is achieved with a capacitor or LC filter in the dc link. The
CSI requires a constant current input; hence, a series inductor is
placed in the dc link.
AC drives generally use standard squirrel cage induction motors.
These motors are rugged, relatively low in cost, and require little
maintenance. Synchronous motors are used where precise speed con-
trol is critical.
A popular ac drive configuration uses a VSI employing PWM tech-
niques to synthesize an ac waveform as a train of variable-width dc
pulses (see Fig. 5.17). The inverter uses either SCRs, gate turnoff
(GTO) thyristors, or power transistors for this purpose. Currently, the
VSI PWM drive offers the best energy efficiency for applications over a
wide speed range for drives up through at least 500 hp. Another advan-
tage of PWM drives is that, unlike other types of drives, it is not nec-
essary to vary rectifier output voltage to control motor speed. This
allows the rectifier thyristors to be replaced with diodes, and the
thyristor control circuitry to be eliminated.
192
Chapter Five
armature
field
may be supplied from same or
separate power supply
6-pulse
thyristor rectifier
v(t)
VA
VB
VC
Figure 5.16
Six-pulse dc ASD.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Very high power drives employ SCRs and inverters. These may be 6-
pulse, as shown in Fig. 5.18, or like large dc drives, 12-pulse. VSI dri-
ves (Fig. 5.18a) are limited to applications that do not require rapid
changes in speed. CSI drives (Fig. 5.18b) have good acceleration/decel-
eration characteristics but require a motor with a leading power factor
(synchronous or induction with capacitors) or added control circuitry to
commutate the inverter thyristors. In either case, the CSI drive must
be designed for use with a specific motor. Thyristors in current source
Fundamentals of Harmonics
193
v(t)
diode
rectifier
transistor
inverter
Va
Vb
Vc
AC
MOTOR
Figure 5.17
PWM ASD.
(a) VSI 
(b) CSI 
v(t)
v(t)
thyristor
inverter
thyristor
rectifier
Va
Vb
Vc
Va
Vb
Vc
AC
MOTOR
AC
MOTOR
Figure 5.18
Large ac ASDs.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

inverters must be protected against inductive voltage spikes, which
increases the cost of this type of drive.
Impact of operating condition.
The harmonic current distortion in
adjustable-speed drives is not constant. The waveform changes signif-
icantly for different speed and torque values.
Figure 5.19 shows two operating conditions for a PWM adjustable-
speed drive. While the waveform at 42 percent speed is much more dis-
torted proportionately, the drive injects considerably higher magnitude
harmonic currents at rated speed. The bar chart shows the amount of
current injected. This will be the limiting design factor, not the highest
THD. Engineers should be careful to understand the basis of data and
measurements concerning these drives before making design decisions.
5.7.2
Arcing devices
This category includes arc furnaces, arc welders, and discharge-type
lighting (fluorescent, sodium vapor, mercury vapor) with magnetic
194
Chapter Five
3
5
7
9
11
13
I(t)
Amperes
Ih
Harmonic Number, h
Rated Speed
42% Speed
Figure 5.19
Effect of PWM ASD speed on ac current harmonics.
V(t)
Figure 5.20
Equivalent circuit
for an arcing device.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

(rather than electronic) ballasts. As shown in Fig. 5.20, the arc is basi-
cally a voltage clamp in series with a reactance that limits current to a
reasonable value.
The voltage-current characteristics of electric arcs are nonlinear.
Following arc ignition, the voltage decreases as the arc current
increases, limited only by the impedance of the power system. This
gives the arc the appearance of having a negative resistance for a por-
tion of its operating cycle such as in fluorescent lighting applications.
In electric arc furnace applications, the limiting impedance is pri-
marily the furnace cable and leads with some contribution from the
power system and furnace transformer. Currents in excess of 60,000 A
are common.
The electric arc itself is actually best represented as a source of voltage
harmonics. If a probe were to be placed directly across the arc, one would
observe a somewhat trapezoidal waveform. Its magnitude is largely a
function of the length of the arc. However, the impedance of ballasts or
furnace leads acts as a buffer so that the supply voltage is only moder-
ately distorted. The arcing load thus appears to be a relatively stable har-
monic current source, which is adequate for most analyses. The exception
occurs when the system is near resonance and a Thevenin equivalent
model using the arc voltage waveform gives more realistic answers.
The harmonic content of an arc furnace load and other arcing devices
is similar to that of the magnetic ballast shown in Fig. 5.12. Three-
phase arcing devices can be arranged to cancel the triplen harmonics
through the transformer connection. However, this cancellation may
not work in three-phase arc furnaces because of the frequent unbal-
anced operation during the melting phase. During the refining stage
when the arc is more constant, the cancellation is better.
5.7.3
Saturable devices
Equipment in this category includes transformers and other electro-
magnetic devices with a steel core, including motors. Harmonics are
generated due to the nonlinear magnetizing characteristics of the steel
(see Fig. 5.21).
Power transformers are designed to normally operate just below the
“knee” point of the magnetizing saturation characteristic. The operat-
ing flux density of a transformer is selected based on a complicated
optimization of steel cost, no-load losses, noise, and numerous other
factors. Many electric utilities will penalize transformer vendors by
various amounts for no-load and load losses, and the vendor will try to
meet the specification with a transformer that has the lowest evaluated
cost. A high-cost penalty on the no-load losses or noise will generally
result in more steel in the core and a higher saturation curve that
yields lower harmonic currents.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
195
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Although transformer exciting current is rich in harmonics at nor-
mal operating voltage (see Fig. 5.22), it is typically less than 1 percent
of rated full load current. Transformers are not as much of a concern as
electronic power converters and arcing devices which can produce har-
monic currents of 20 percent of their rating, or higher. However, their
effect will be noticeable, particularly on utility distribution systems,
which have hundreds of transformers. It is common to notice a signifi-
cant increase in triplen harmonic currents during the early morning
hours when the load is low and the voltage rises. Transformer exciting
current is more visible then because there is insufficient load to obscure
it and the increased voltage causes more current to be produced.
Harmonic voltage distortion from transformer overexcitation is gener-
ally only apparent under these light load conditions.
Some transformers are purposefully operated in the saturated
region. One example is a triplen transformer used to generate 180 Hz
for induction furnaces.
Motors also exhibit some distortion in the current when overexcited,
although it is generally of little consequence. There are, however, some
fractional horsepower, single-phase motors that have a nearly triangu-
lar waveform with significant third-harmonic currents.
The waveform shown in Fig. 5.22 is for single-phase or wye-grounded
three-phase transformers. The current obviously contains a large
amount of third harmonic. Delta connections and ungrounded-wye con-
nections prevent the flow of zero-sequence harmonic, which triplens
tend to be. Thus, the line current will be void of these harmonics unless
there is an imbalance in the system.
196
Chapter Five
Voltage
Current
100%
“Knee”
Figure 5.21
Transformer magnetizing characteristic.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

5.8
Locating Harmonic Sources
On radial utility distribution feeders and industrial plant power sys-
tems, the main tendency is for the harmonic currents to flow from the
harmonic-producing load to the power system source. This is illus-
trated in Fig. 5.23. The impedance of the power system is normally the
lowest impedance seen by the harmonic currents. Thus, the bulk of the
current flows into the source.
This general tendency of harmonic current flows can be used to
locate sources of harmonics. Using a power quality monitor capable of
reporting the harmonic content of the current, simply measure the har-
Fundamentals of Harmonics
197
–1.50
–1.00
–0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.07
0.08
Amp
Time (s)
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
60
180
300
420
540
Magnitude
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 5.22
Transformer magnetizing current and harmonic spectrum.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

monic currents in each branch starting at the beginning of the circuit
and trace the harmonics to the source.
Power factor correction capacitors can alter this flow pattern for at
least one of the harmonics. For example, adding a capacitor to the pre-
vious circuit as shown in Fig. 5.24 may draw a large amount of har-
monic current into that portion of the circuit. In such a situation,
following the path of the harmonic current will lead to a capacitor bank
instead of the actual harmonic source. Thus, it is generally necessary
to temporarily disconnect all capacitors to reliably locate the sources of
harmonics.
It is usually straightforward to differentiate harmonic currents due
to actual sources from harmonic currents that are strictly due to reso-
nance involving a capacitor bank. A resonance current typically has
only one dominant harmonic riding on top of the fundamental sine
wave. Note that none of the harmonic sources presented earlier in this
chapter produce a single harmonic frequency in addition to the funda-
mental. They all produce more than one single harmonic frequency.
Waveforms of these harmonic sources have somewhat arbitrary wave-
shapes depending on the distorting phenomena, but they contain sev-
eral harmonics in significant quantities. A single, large, significant
harmonic nearly always signifies resonance.
This fact can be exploited to determine if harmonic resonance prob-
lems are likely to exist in a system with capacitors. Simply measure the
current in the capacitors. If it contains a very large amount of one har-
monic other than the fundamental, it is likely that the capacitor is par-
ticipating in a resonant circuit within the power system. Always check
the capacitor currents first in any installations where harmonic prob-
lems are suspected.
Another method to locate harmonic sources is by correlating the time
variations of the voltage distortion with specific customer and load
198
Chapter Five
Figure 5.23
General flow of harmonic currents in a radial power system.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

characteristics. Patterns from the harmonic distortion measurements
can be compared to particular types of loads, such as arc furnaces, mill
drives, and mass transits which appear intermittently. Correlating the
time from the measurements and the actual operation time can iden-
tify the harmonic source.
5.9
System Response Characteristics
In power systems, the response of the system is equally as important
as the sources of harmonics. In fact, power systems are quite tolerant
of the currents injected by harmonic-producing loads unless there is
some adverse interaction with the impedance of the system.
Identifying the sources is only half the job of harmonic analysis. The
response of the power system at each harmonic frequency determines
the true impact of the nonlinear load on harmonic voltage distortion.
There are three primary variables affecting the system response
characteristics, i.e., the system impedance, the presence of a capacitor
bank, and the amount of resistive loads in the system. Sections 5.9.1
through 5.9.4 detail these variables.
5.9.1
System impedance
At the fundamental frequency, power systems are primarily inductive,
and the equivalent impedance is sometimes called simply the short-cir-
cuit reactance. Capacitive effects are frequently neglected on utility
distribution systems and industrial power systems. One of the most
frequently used quantities in the analysis of harmonics on power sys-
tems is the short-circuit impedance to the point on a network at which
a capacitor is located. If not directly available, it can be computed from
Fundamentals of Harmonics
199
NORMAL PATH
ALTERED PATH
Figure 5.24
Power factor capacitors can alter the direction of flow of one of the har-
monic components of the current.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

short-circuit study results that give either the short-circuit mega-
voltampere (MVA) or the short-circuit current as follows:
ZSC  RSC  jXSC 

(5.15)
where ZSC  short-circuit impedance
RSC  short-circuit resistance
XSC  short-circuit reactance
kV  phase-to-phase voltage, kV
MVASC  three-phase short-circuit MVA
ISC  short-circuit current, A
ZSC is a phasor quantity, consisting of both resistance and reactance.
However, if the short-circuit data contain no phase information, one is
usually constrained to assuming that the impedance is purely reac-
tive. This is a reasonably good assumption for industrial power sys-
tems for buses close to the mains and for most utility systems. When
this is not the case, an effort should be made to determine a more real-
istic resistance value because that will affect the results once capaci-
tors are considered.
The inductive reactance portion of the impedance changes linearly
with frequency. One common error made by novices in harmonic analy-
sis is to forget to adjust the reactance for frequency. The reactance at
the hth harmonic is determined from the fundamental impedance reac-
tance X1 by:
Xh  hX1
(5.16)
In most power systems, one can generally assume that the resistance
does not change significantly when studying the effects of harmonics less
than the ninth. For lines and cables, the resistance varies approximately
by the square root of the frequency once skin effect becomes significant
in the conductor at a higher frequency. The exception to this rule is with
some transformers. Because of stray eddy current losses, the apparent
resistance of larger transformers may vary almost proportionately with
the frequency. This can have a very beneficial effect on damping of reso-
nance as will be shown later. In smaller transformers, less than 100 kVA,
the resistance of the winding is often so large relative to the other imped-
ances that it swamps out the stray eddy current effects and there is lit-
tle change in the total apparent resistance until the frequency reaches
about 500 Hz. Of course, these smaller transformers may have an X/R
kV  1000

3ISC
kV 2

MVASC
200
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ratio of 1.0 to 2.0 at fundamental frequency, while large substation trans-
formers might typically have a ratio of 20 to 30. Therefore, if the bus that
is being studied is dominated by transformer impedance rather than line
impedance, the system impedance model should be considered more
carefully. Neglecting the resistance will generally give a conservatively
high prediction of the harmonic distortion.
At utilization voltages, such as industrial power systems, the equiv-
alent system reactance is often dominated by the service transformer
impedance. A good approximation for XSC may be based on the imped-
ance of the service entrance transformer only:
XSC ≈Xtx
(5.17)
While not precise, this is generally at least 90 percent of the total
impedance and is commonly more. This is usually sufficient to evalu-
ate whether or not there will be a significant harmonic resonance prob-
lem. Transformer impedance in ohms can be determined from the
percent impedance Ztx found on the nameplate by
Xtx 
  Ztx (%)
(5.18)
where MVA3 is the kVA rating of the transformer. This assumes that
the impedance is predominantly reactive. For example for a 1500-kVA,
6 percent transformer, the equivalent impedance on the 480-V side is
Xtx 
  Ztx (%) 
  0.06  0.0092 Ω
A plot of impedance versus frequency for an inductive system (no
capacitors installed) would look like Fig. 5.25. Real power systems are
not quite as well behaved. This simple model neglects capacitance,
which cannot be done for harmonic analysis.
5.9.2
Capacitor impedance
Shunt capacitors, either at the customer location for power factor cor-
rection or on the distribution system for voltage control, dramatically
alter the system impedance variation with frequency. Capacitors do not
create harmonics, but severe harmonic distortion can sometimes be
attributed to their presence. While the reactance of inductive compo-
0.4802

1.5
kV2

MVA3
kV2

MVA3
Fundamentals of Harmonics
201
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

nents increases proportionately to frequency, capacitive reactance XC
decreases proportionately:
XC 
(5.19)
C is the capacitance in farads. This quantity is seldom readily available
for power capacitors, which are rated in terms of kvar or Mvar at a
given voltage. The equivalent line-to-neutral capacitive reactance at
fundamental frequency for a capacitor bank can be determined by
XC 
(5.20)
For three-phase banks, use phase-to-phase voltage and the three-
phase reactive power rating. For single-phase units, use the capacitor
voltage rating and the reactive power rating. For example, for a three-
phase, 1200-kvar, 13.8-kV capacitor bank, the positive-sequence reac-
tance in ohms would be
XC 

 158.7 Ω
13.82

1.2
kV2

Mvar
kV2

Mvar
1

2	fC
202
Chapter Five
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
Impedance (ohms)
Frequency (Hz)
Figure 5.25
Impedance versus frequency for inductive system.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

5.9.3
Parallel resonance
All circuits containing both capacitances and inductances have one or
more natural frequencies. When one of those frequencies lines up with
a frequency that is being produced on the power system, a resonance
may develop in which the voltage and current at that frequency con-
tinue to persist at very high values. This is the root of most problems
with harmonic distortion on power systems.
Figure 5.26 shows a distribution system with potential parallel res-
onance problems. From the perspective of harmonic sources the shunt
capacitor appears in parallel with the equivalent system inductance
(source and transformer inductances) at harmonic frequencies as
depicted in Fig. 5.27b. Furthermore, since the power system is
assumed to have an equivalent voltage source of fundamental fre-
quency only, the power system voltage source appears short circuited in
the figure.
Parallel resonance occurs when the reactance of XC and the distribu-
tion system cancel each other out. The frequency at which this phe-
nomenon occurs is called the parallel resonant frequency. It can be
expressed as follows:
fp 
  ≈

(5.21)
where R  resistance of combined equivalent source and transformer
(not shown in Fig. 5.27)
Leq  inductance of combined equivalent source and transformer
C  capacitance of capacitor bank
At the resonant frequency, the apparent impedance of the parallel
combination of the equivalent inductance and capacitance as seen from
the harmonic current source becomes very large, i.e.,
Zp 

≈

 QXLeq  QXC
(5.22)
XC
2

R
X2
Leq

R
XC (XLeq  R)

R
XC (XLeq  R)

XC  XLeq  R
1

LeqC
1

2	
R2

4L2eq
1

LeqC
1

2	
Fundamentals of Harmonics
203
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

where Q  XL/R  XC/R and R 

 XLeq. Keep in mind that the reac-
tances in this equation are computed at the resonant frequency.
Q often is known as the quality factor of a resonant circuit that deter-
mines the sharpness of the frequency response. Q varies considerably
by location on the power system. It might be less than 5 on a distribu-
tion feeder and more than 30 on the secondary bus of a large step-down
transformer. From Eq. (5.22), it is clear that during parallel resonance,
a small harmonic current can cause a large voltage drop across the
apparent impedance, i.e., Vp  QXLeqIh. The voltage near the capacitor
bank will be magnified and heavily distorted.
Let us now examine current behavior during the parallel resonance.
Let the current flowing in the capacitor bank or into the power system
be Iresonance; thus,
Iresonance 

 QIh
or
Iresonance 

 QIh
(5.23)
From Eq. (5.23), it is clear that currents flowing in the capacitor bank
and in the power system (i.e., through the transformer) will also be
magnified Q times. This phenomenon will likely cause capacitor fail-
ure, fuse blowing, or transformer overheating.
QXLeqIh

XLeq
Vp

XLeq
QXCIh

XC
Vp

XC
204
Chapter Five
Figure 5.26
System with potential parallel resonance problems.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The extent of voltage and current magnification is determined by the
size of the shunt capacitor bank. Figure 5.28 shows the effect of vary-
ing capacitor size in relation to the transformer on the impedance seen
from the harmonic source and compared with the case in which there
is no capacitor. The following illustrates how the parallel resonant fre-
quency is computed.
Power systems analysts typically do not have L and C readily avail-
able and prefer to use other forms of this relationship. They commonly
compute the resonant harmonic hr based on fundamental frequency
impedances and ratings using one of the following:
hr   	
(5.24)
where
hr  resonant harmonic
XC  capacitor reactance
kVAtx  100

kvarcap  Ztx (%)
MVASC

Mvarcap
XC

XSC
Fundamentals of Harmonics
205
Magnified
harmonic
current
Magnified
voltage at
substation bus
Harmonic
source
(a)
(b)
XLeq
Xsource
XT
XC
QIh
XC
Xsource
XT
Ih
Zp
Ih
Figure 5.27
At harmonic frequencies, the shunt capacitor bank appears in paral-
lel with the system inductance. (a) Simplified distribution circuit; (b) parallel res-
onant circuit as seen from the harmonic source.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

XSC  system short-circuit reactance
MVASC  system short-circuit MVA
MVAcap Mvar rating of capacitor bank
kVAtx  kVA rating of step-down transformer
Ztx  step-down transformer impedance
kvarcap  kvar rating of capacitor bank
For example, for an industrial load bus where the transformer imped-
ance is dominant, the resonant harmonic for a 1500-kVA, 6 percent
transformer and a 500-kvar capacitor bank is approximately
hr ≈
 
 7.07
5.9.4
Series resonance
There are certain instances when a shunt capacitor and the inductance
of a transformer or distribution line may appear as a series LC circuit
to a source of harmonic currents. If the resonant frequency corresponds
to a characteristic harmonic frequency of the nonlinear load, the LC cir-
cuit will attract a large portion of the harmonic current that is gener-
ated in the distribution system. A customer having no nonlinear load,
but utilizing power factor correction capacitors, may in this way expe-
rience high harmonic voltage distortion due to neighboring harmonic
sources. This situation is depicted in Fig. 5.29.
1500  100

500  6
kVAtx  100

kvarcap  Ztx (%)
206
Chapter Five
0
10
20
30
40
50
50%
30%
Zh
= 10%
No Capacitor
Harmon
kvarcap
kVAtx
Harmonic Number h
1
5
9
13
17
21
Figure 5.28
System frequency response as capacitor size is varied in relation to
transformer.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

During resonance, the power factor correction capacitor forms a
series circuit with the transformer and harmonic sources. The simpli-
fied circuit is shown in Fig. 5.30. The harmonic source shown in this fig-
ure represents the total harmonics produced by other loads. The
inductance in series with the capacitor is that of the service entrance
transformer. The series combination of the transformer inductance and
the capacitor bank is very small (theoretically zero) and only limited by
its resistance. Thus the harmonic current corresponding to the reso-
nant frequency will flow freely in this circuit. The voltage at the power
factor correction capacitor is magnified and highly distorted. This is
apparent from the following equation:
Vs (at power factor capacitor bank) 
Vh ≈
Vh
(5.25)
where Vh and Vs are the harmonic voltage corresponding to the har-
monic current Ih and the voltage at the power factor capacitor bank,
respectively. The resistance R of the series resonant circuit is not
shown in Fig. 5.30, and it is small compared to the reactance.
The negligible impedance of the series resonant circuit can be
exploited to absorb desired harmonic currents. This is indeed the prin-
ciple in designing a notch filter.
In many systems with potential series resonance problems, parallel
resonance also arises due to the circuit topology. One of these is shown
in Fig. 5.30 where the parallel resonance is formed by the parallel com-
bination between Xsource and a series between XT and XC. The resulting
parallel resonant frequency is always smaller than its series resonant
XC

R
Xc

XT  XC  R
Fundamentals of Harmonics
207
Distribution
Substation Bus
Customer
Power Factor
Correction
High-
Voltage
Distortion
High
Harmonic
Currents
Figure 5.29
System with potential series resonance problems.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

frequency due to the source inductance contribution. The parallel res-
onant frequency can be represented by the following equation:
hr  
(5.26)
5.9.5
Effects of resistance and resistive load
Determining that the resonant harmonic aligns with a common har-
monic source is not always cause for alarm. The damping provided by
resistance in the system is often sufficient to prevent catastrophic volt-
ages and currents. Figure 5.31 shows the parallel resonant circuit
impedance characteristic for various amounts of resistive load in paral-
lel with the capacitance. As little as 10 percent resistive loading can
have a significant beneficial impact on peak impedance. Likewise, if
there is a significant length of lines or cables between the capacitor bus
and the nearest upline transformer, the resonance will be suppressed.
Lines and cables can add a significant amount of the resistance to the
equivalent circuit.
Loads and line resistances are the reasons why catastrophic har-
monic problems from capacitors on utility distribution feeders are sel-
dom seen. That is not to say that there will not be any harmonic
problems due to resonance, but the problems will generally not cause
physical damage to the electrical system components. The most trou-
XC

XT  Xsource
208
Chapter Five
Harmonic number h
Z
Series resonance:
Parallel
resonance:
XT
XC
hs =
Xsource
XT
XC
hr
+
=
Xsource
XT
XC
Ih
Figure 5.30
Frequency response of a circuit with series resonance.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Fundamentals of Harmonics
209
blesome resonant conditions occur when capacitors are installed on sub-
station buses, either utility substations or in industrial facilities. In
these cases, where the transformer dominates the system impedance
and has a high X/R ratio, the relative resistance is low and the corre-
sponding parallel resonant impedance peak is very sharp and high. This
is a common cause of capacitor, transformer, or load equipment failure.
While utility distribution engineers may be able to place feeder
banks with little concern about resonance, studies should always be
performed for industrial capacitor applications and for utility substa-
tion applications. Utility engineers familiar with the problems indicate
that about 20 percent of industrial installations for which no studies
are performed have major operating disruptions or equipment failure
due to resonance. In fact, selecting capacitor sizes from manufacturers’
tables to correct the power factor based on average monthly billing data
tends to result in a combination that tunes the system near the fifth
harmonic. This is one of the worst harmonics to which to be tuned
because it is frequently the largest component in the system.
It is a misconception that resistive loads damp harmonics because in
the absence of resonance, loads of any kind will have little impact on
the harmonic currents and resulting voltage distortion. Most of the cur-
rent will flow back into the power source. However, it is very appropri-
ate to say that resistive loads will damp resonance, which will lead to a
significant reduction in the harmonic distortion.
Motor loads are primarily inductive and provide little damping. In
fact, they may increase distortion by shifting the system resonant fre-
quency closer to a significant harmonic. Small, fractional-horsepower
motors may contribute significantly to damping because their apparent
X/R ratio is lower than that of large three-phase motors.
5.10
Effects of Harmonic Distortion
Harmonic currents produced by nonlinear loads are injected back into
the supply systems. These currents can interact adversely with a wide
h
Z
0% Resistive Load
10%
20%
Figure 5.31
Effect of resistive loads on parallel resonance.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

range of power system equipment, most notably capacitors, transform-
ers, and motors, causing additional losses, overheating, and overload-
ing. These harmonic currents can also cause interference with
telecommunication lines and errors in power metering. Sections 5.10.1
through 5.10.5 discuss impacts of harmonic distortion on various power
system components.
5.10.1
Impact on capacitors
Problems involving harmonics often show up at capacitor banks first.
As discussed in Secs. 5.9.3 and 5.9.4, a capacitor bank experiences high
voltage distortion during resonance. The current flowing in the capac-
itor bank is also significantly large and rich in a monotonic harmonic.
Figure 5.32 shows a current waveform of a capacitor bank in resonance
with the system at the 11th harmonic. The harmonic current shows up
distinctly, resulting in a waveform that is essentially the 11th har-
monic riding on top of the fundamental frequency. This current wave-
form typically indicates that the system is in resonance and a capacitor
bank is involved. In such a resonance condition, the rms current is typ-
ically higher than the capacitor rms current rating.
IEEE Standard for Shunt Power Capacitors (IEEE Standard 18-
1992) specifies the following continuous capacitor ratings:
■135 percent of nameplate kvar
■110 percent of rated rms voltage (including harmonics but excluding
transients)
■180 percent of rated rms current (including fundamental and har-
monic current)
■120 percent of peak voltage (including harmonics)
Table 5.1 summarizes an example capacitor evaluation using a com-
puter spreadsheet that is designed to help evaluate the various capac-
itor duties against the standards.
The fundamental full-load current for the 1200-kvar capacitor bank
is determined from
IC 

 50.2 A
The capacitor is subjected principally to two harmonics: the fifth and
the seventh. The voltage distortion consists of 4 percent fifth and 3 per-
cent seventh. This results in 20 percent fifth harmonic current and 21
percent seventh harmonic current. The resultant values all come out
1200

3  13.8
kvar3

3  kVLL
210
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

well below standard limits in this case, as shown in the box at the bot-
tom of Table 5.1.
5.10.2
Impact on transformers
Transformers are designed to deliver the required power to the con-
nected loads with minimum losses at fundamental frequency.
Harmonic distortion of the current, in particular, as well as of the volt-
age will contribute significantly to additional heating. To design a
transformer to accommodate higher frequencies, designers make dif-
ferent design choices such as using continuously transposed cable
instead of solid conductor and putting in more cooling ducts. As a gen-
eral rule, a transformer in which the current distortion exceeds 5 per-
cent is a candidate for derating for harmonics.
There are three effects that result in increased transformer heating
when the load current includes harmonic components:
1. RMS current.
If the transformer is sized only for the kVA require-
ments of the load, harmonic currents may result in the transformer
rms current being higher than its capacity. The increased total rms
current results in increased conductor losses.
2. Eddy current losses.
These are induced currents in a transformer
caused by the magnetic fluxes. These induced currents flow in the
windings, in the core, and in other conducting bodies subjected to
the magnetic field of the transformer and cause additional heating.
This component of the transformer losses increases with the square
of the frequency of the current causing the eddy currents. Therefore,
Fundamentals of Harmonics
211
0
10
20
30
–200
–150
–100
–50
   0
  50
 100
 150
 200
Time (ms)
Current (A)
Figure 5.32
Typical capacitor current from a system in 11th-harmonic resonance.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

this becomes a very important component of transformer losses for
harmonic heating.
3. Core losses.
The increase in core losses in the presence of harmon-
ics will be dependent on the effect of the harmonics on the applied
voltage and the design of the transformer core. Increasing the volt-
age distortion may increase the eddy currents in the core lamina-
tions. The net impact that this will have depends on the thickness of
212
Chapter Five
 Recommended Practice for Establishing Capacitor Capabilities
    When Supplied by Nonsinusoidal Voltages
IEEE Std 18-1980
  Capacitor Bank Data:
Bank Rating:
1200
kVAr
Voltage Rating:
13800
V (L-L)
Operating Voltage:
13800
V (L-L)
Supplied Compensation:
1200
kVAr
Fundamental Current Rating:
50.2
Amps
Fundamental Frequency:
60
Hz
Capacitive Reactance:
158.700
Ω
  Harmonic Distribution of Bus Voltage:
Harmonic
Number
Frequency
(Hertz)
Volt Mag Vh
(% of Fund.)
Volt Mag Vh
(Volts)
Line Current Ih
(% of Fund.)
1
60
100.00
7967.4
100.00
3
180
0.00
0.0
0.00
5
300
4.00
318.7
20.00
7
420
3.00
239.0
21.00
11
660
0.00
0.0
0.00
13
780
0.00
0.0
0.00
17
1020
0.00
0.0
0.00
19
1140
0.00
0.0
0.00
21
1260
0.00
0.0
0.00
23
1380
0.00
0.0
0.00
25
1500
0.00
0.0
0.00
Voltage Distortion (THD):
5.00 %
RMS Capacitor Voltage:
7977.39 Volts
 Capacitor Current Distortion:
29.00 %
RMS Capacitor Current:
52.27 Amps
  Capacitor Bank Limits:
Calculated
Limit
Exceeds Limit
Peak Voltage:
107.0%
120%
No
RMS Voltage:
100.1%
110%
No
RMS Current:
104.1%
180%
No
kVAr:
104.3%
135%
No
TABLE 5.1
Example Capacitor Evaluation
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the core laminations and the quality of the core steel. The increase
in these losses due to harmonics is generally not as critical as the
previous two.
Guidelines for transformer derating are detailed in ANSI/IEEE
Standard C57.110-1998, Recommended Practice for Establishing
Transformer 
Capability 
When 
Supplying 
Nonsinusoidal 
Load
Currents. The common K factor used in the power quality field for
transformer derating is also included in Table 5.2.2
The analysis represented in Table 5.2 can be summarized as follows.
The load loss PLL can be considered to have two components: I2R loss
and eddy current loss PEC:
PLL  I2R  PECW
(5.27)
The I2R loss is directly proportional to the rms value of the current.
However, the eddy current is proportional to the square of the current
and frequency, which is defined by
PEC  KEC  I2  h2
(5.28)
where KEC is the proportionality constant.
The per-unit full-load loss under harmonic current conditions is
given by
PLL  ∑Ih
2  (∑Ih
2  h2 ) PEC  R
(5.29)
where PEC  R is the eddy current loss factor under rated conditions.
The K factor3 commonly found in power quality literature concerning
transformer derating can be defined solely in terms of the harmonic
currents as follows:
Fundamentals of Harmonics
213
TABLE 5.2
Typical Values of PEC  R
Type
MVA
Voltage
PEC  R, %
Dry
1
—
3–8
1.5
5 kV HV
12–20
1.5
15 kV HV
9–15
Oil-filled
2.5
480 V LV
1
2.5–5
480 V LV
1–5
5
480 V LV
9–15
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

K 
(5.30)
Then, in terms of the K factor, the rms of the distorted current is
derived to be
∑Ih
2
 
(pu) 
(5.31)
where PEC  R  eddy current loss factor
h  harmonic number
Ih  harmonic current
Thus, the transformer derating can be estimated by knowing the per-
unit eddy current loss factor. This factor can be determined by
1. Obtaining the factor from the transformer designer
2. Using transformer test data and the procedure in ANSI/IEEE
Standard C57.110
3. Typical values based on transformer type and size (see Table 5.2)
Exceptions.
There are often cases with transformers that do not appear
to have a harmonics problem from the criteria given in Table 5.2, yet are
running hot or failing due to what appears to be overload. One common
case found with grounded-wye transformers is that the line currents
contain about 8 percent third harmonic, which is relatively low, and the
transformer is overheating at less than rated load. Why would this
transformer pass the heat run test in the factory, and, perhaps, an over-
load test also, and fail to perform as expected in practice? Discounting
mechanical cooling problems, chances are good that there is some con-
ducting element in the magnetic field that is being affected by the har-
monic fluxes. Three of several possibilities are as follows:
■Zero-sequence fluxes will “escape” the core on three-legged core
designs (the most popular design for utility distribution substation
transformers). This is illustrated in Fig. 5.33. The 3d, 9th, 15th, etc.,
harmonics are predominantly zero-sequence. Therefore, if the winding
connections are proper to allow zero-sequence current flow, these har-
monic fluxes can cause additional heating in the tanks, core clamps,
etc., that would not necessarily be found under balanced three-phase
or single-phase tests. The 8 percent line current previously mentioned
1  PEC  R

1  K  PEC  R
∑(Ih
2  h2)

∑Ih
2
214
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

translates to a neutral third-harmonic current of 24 percent of the
phase current. This could add considerably to the leakage flux in the
tank and in the oil and air space. Two indicators are charred or bub-
bled paint on the tank and evidence of heating on the end of a bayonet
fuse tube (without blowing the fuse) or bushing end.
■DC offsets in the current can also cause flux to “escape” the confines of
the core. The core will become slightly saturated on, for example, the
positive half cycle while remaining normal for the negative half cycle.
There are a number of electronic power converters that produce current
waveforms that are nonsymmetrical either by accident or by design.
This can result in a small dc offset on the load side of the transformer
(it can’t be measured from the source side). Only a small amount of dc
offset is required to cause problems with most power transformers.
■There may be a clamping structure, bushing end, or some other con-
ducting element too close to the magnetic field. It may be sufficiently
small in size that there is no notable effect in stray losses at funda-
mental frequency but may produce a hot spot when subjected to har-
monic fluxes.
5.10.3
Impact on motors
Motors can be significantly impacted by the harmonic voltage distor-
tion. Harmonic voltage distortion at the motor terminals is translated
Fundamentals of Harmonics
215



TANK
FLUX LINKS FUSE HOLDER OR
BUSHING END
HOT SPOTS ON TANK
MAY CAUSE PAINT TO
BLISTER OR CHAR
ZERO-SEQUENCE FLUX IS IDENTICAL
IN ALL THREE LEGS
Figure 5.33
Zero-sequence flux in three-legged core transformers enters the tank and the
air and oil space.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

into harmonic fluxes within the motor. Harmonic fluxes do not con-
tribute significantly to motor torque, but rotate at a frequency different
than the rotor synchronous frequency, basically inducing high-fre-
quency currents in the rotor. The effect on motors is similar to that of
negative-sequence currents at fundamental frequency: The additional
fluxes do little more than induce additional losses. Decreased efficiency
along with heating, vibration, and high-pitched noises are indicators of
harmonic voltage distortion.
At harmonic frequencies, motors can usually be represented by the
blocked rotor reactance connected across the line. The lower-order har-
monic voltage components, for which the magnitudes are larger and
the apparent motor impedance lower, are usually the most important
for motors.
There is usually no need to derate motors if the voltage distortion
remains within IEEE Standard 519-1992 limits of 5 percent THD and
3 percent for any individual harmonic. Excessive heating problems
begin when the voltage distortion reaches 8 to 10 percent and higher.
Such distortion should be corrected for long motor life.
Motors appear to be in parallel with the power system impedance
with respect to the harmonic current flow and generally shift the sys-
tem resonance higher by causing the net inductance to decrease.
Whether this is detrimental to the system depends on the location of
the system resonance prior to energizing the motor. Motors also may
contribute to the damping of some of the harmonic components depend-
ing on the X/R ratio of the blocked rotor circuit. In systems with many
smaller-sized motors, which have a low X/R ratio, this could help atten-
uate harmonic resonance. However, one cannot depend on this for large
motors.
5.10.4
Impact on telecommunications
Harmonic currents flowing on the utility distribution system or within
an end-user facility can create interference in communication circuits
sharing a common path. Voltages induced in parallel conductors by the
common harmonic currents often fall within the bandwidth of normal
voice communications. Harmonics between 540 (ninth harmonic) and
1200 Hz are particularly disruptive. The induced voltage per ampere of
current increases with frequency. Triplen harmonics (3d, 9th, 15th) are
especially troublesome in four-wire systems because they are in phase
in all conductors of a three-phase circuit and, therefore, add directly in
the neutral circuit, which has the greatest exposure with the commu-
nications circuit.
Harmonic currents on the power system are coupled into communi-
cation circuits by either induction or direct conduction. Figure 5.34
illustrates coupling from the neutral of an overhead distribution line by
216
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

induction. This was a severe problem in the days of open wire telephone
circuits. Now, with the prevalent use of shielded, twisted-pair conduc-
tors for telephone circuits, this mode of coupling is less significant. The
direct inductive coupling is equal in both conductors, resulting in zero
net voltage in the loop formed by the conductors.
Inductive coupling can still be a problem if high currents are induced
in the shield surrounding the telephone conductors. Current flowing in
the shield causes an IR drop (Fig. 5.35), which results in a potential dif-
ference in the ground references at the ends of the telephone cable.
Shield currents can also be caused by direct conduction. As illustrated
in Fig. 5.36, the shield is in parallel with the power system ground path.
If local ground conditions are such that a relatively large amount of cur-
rent flows in the shield, high shield IR drop will again cause a potential
difference in the ground references at the ends of the telephone cable.
5.10.5
Impact on energy and demand
metering
Electric utility companies usually measure energy consumption in two
quantities: the total cumulative energy consumed and the maximum
power used for a given period. Thus, there are two charges in any given
billing period especially for larger industrial customers: energy charges
and demand charges. Residential customers are typically charged for
the energy consumption only. The energy charge represents the costs of
producing and supplying the total energy consumed over a billing
period and is measured in kilowatt-hours. The second part of the bill,
the demand charge, represents utility costs to maintain adequate elec-
Fundamentals of Harmonics
217
NEUTRAL
FLUX
LINKAGES
COMMUNICATIONS
CABLE
CURRENT
Figure 5.34
Inductive coupling of power system residual current to telephone circuit.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

trical capacity at all times to meet each customer’s peak demand for
energy use. The demand charge reflects the utility’s fixed cost in pro-
viding peak power requirements. The demand charge is usually deter-
mined by the highest 15- or 30-min peak demand of use in a billing
period and is measured in kilowatts.
Both energy and demand charges are measured using the so-called
watthour and demand meters. A demand meter is usually integrated to
a watthour meter with a timing device to register the peak power use
and returns the demand pointer to zero at the end of each timing inter-
val (typically 15 or 30 min).
Harmonic currents from nonlinear loads can impact the accuracy of
watthour and demand meters adversely. Traditional watthour meters
are based on the induction motor principle. The rotor element or the
rotating disk inside the meter revolves at a speed proportional to the
power flow. This disk in turn drives a series of gears that move dials on
a register.
Conventional magnetic disk watthour meters tend to have a negative
error at harmonic frequencies. That is, they register low for power at
harmonic frequencies if they are properly calibrated for fundamental
frequency. This error increases with increasing frequency. In general,
nonlinear loads tend to inject harmonic power back onto the supply sys-
tem and linear loads absorb harmonic power due to the distortion in
the voltage. This is depicted in Fig. 5.37 by showing the directions on
the currents.
218
Chapter Five
TWISTED
PAIR
SHIELD
ISHIELD
VLOOP
VC = COMMUNICATION
SIGNAL
d
Figure 5.35
IR drop in cable shield resulting in potential differences in ground references
at ends of cable.
POWER SYSTEM NEUTRAL 
COMMUNICATIONS CABLE
RESIDUAL
CURRENT
Figure 5.36
Conductive coupling through a common ground path.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Thus for the nonlinear load in Fig. 5.37, the meter would read
Pmeasured  P1  a3P3  a5P5  a7P7  . . .
(5.32)
where a3, a5, and a7 are multiplying factors (
 1.0) that represent the
inaccuracy of the meter at harmonic frequency. The measured power is
a little greater than that actually used in the load because the meter
does not subtract off quite all the harmonic powers. However, these
powers simply go to feed the line and transformer losses, and some
would argue that they should not be subtracted at all. That is, the 
customer injecting the harmonic currents should pay something addi-
tional for the increased losses in the power delivery system.
In the case of the linear load, the measured power is
Pmeasured  P1  a3P3  a5P5  a7P7  . . . 
(5.33)
The linear load absorbs the additional energy, but the meter does not
register as much energy as is actually consumed. The question is, Does
the customer really want the extra energy? If the load consists of
motors, the answer is no, because the extra energy results in losses
induced in the motors from harmonic distortion. If the load is resistive,
the energy is likely to be efficiently consumed.
Fortunately, in most practical cases where the voltage distortion is
within electricity supply recommended limits, the error is very small
(much less than 1 percent). The latest electronic meters in use today
are based on time-division and digital sampling. These electronic
meters are much more accurate than the conventional watthour meter
based on induction motor principle. Although these electronic watthour
meters are able to measure harmonic components, they could be set to
measure only the fundamental power. The user should be careful to
ascertain that the meters are measuring the desired quantity.
The greatest potential errors occur when metering demand. The
metering error is the result of ignoring the portion of the apparent
power that is due solely to the harmonic distortion. Some metering
schemes accurately measure the active (P) and reactive power (Q), but
Fundamentals of Harmonics
219
etc.
I1
I5
I3
I7
I1
I5
I3
I7
etc.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.37
Nominal direction of harmonic currents in (a) nonlinear load and (b) linear
load (voltage is distorted).
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

basically ignore D. If Q is determined by a second watthour meter fed
by a voltage that is phase-shifted from the energy meter, the D term is
generally not accounted for—only Q at the fundamental is measured.
Even some electronic meters do not account for the total apparent
power properly, although many newer meters are certified to properly
account for harmonics. Thus, the errors for this metering scheme are
such that the measured kVA demand is less than actual. The error
would be in favor of the customer.
The worst errors occur when the total current at the metering site is
greatly distorted. The total kVA demand can be off by 10 to 15 percent.
Fortunately, at the metering point for total plant load, the current dis-
tortion is not as greatly distorted as individual load currents.
Therefore, the metering error is frequently fairly small. There are,
however, some exceptions to this such as pumping stations where a
PWM drive is the only load on the meter. While the energy meter
should be sufficiently accurate given that the voltage has low distor-
tion, the demand metering could have substantial error.
5.11
Interharmonics
According to the Fourier theory, a periodic waveform can be expressed
as a sum of pure sine waves of different amplitudes where the fre-
quency of each sinusoid is an integer multiple of the fundamental fre-
quency of the periodic waveform. A frequency that is an integer
multiple of the fundamental frequency is called a harmonic frequency,
i.e., fh  hf0 where f0 and h are the fundamental frequency and an inte-
ger number, respectively.
On the other hand, the sum of two or more pure sine waves with dif-
ferent amplitudes where the frequency of each sinusoid is not an inte-
ger multiple of the fundamental frequency does not necessarily result
in a periodic waveform. This noninteger multiple of the fundamental
frequency is commonly known as an interharmonic frequency, i.e., fih 
hif0 where hi is a noninteger number larger than unity. Thus in practi-
cal terms, interharmonic frequencies are frequencies between two
adjacent harmonic frequencies.
One primary source of interharmonics is the widespread use of elec-
tronic power converter loads capable of producing current distortion
over a whole range of frequencies, i.e., characteristic and noncharacter-
istic frequencies.4 Examples of these loads are adjustable-speed drives
in industrial applications and PWM inverters in UPS applications,
active filters, and custom power conditioning equipment. As illustrated
in Fig. 5.18, the front end of an adjustable-speed drive is typically a
diode rectifier that converts an incoming ac voltage to a dc voltage. An
inverter then converts the dc voltage to variable ac voltage with variable
220
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

frequency. The inverter can produce interharmonics in the current espe-
cially when the inverter employs an asynchronous switching scheme.
An asynchronous switching scheme is when the ratio of the switching
frequency of the power electronic switches is an integer multiple of the
fundamental frequency of the inverter voltage output.5 If the harmonic
current passes through the dc link and propagates into the supply sys-
tem, interharmonic-related problems may arise.
Another significant source of interharmonic distortion commonly
comes from rapidly changing load current such as in induction furnaces
and cycloconverters. The rapid fluctuation of load current causes side-
band frequencies to appear around the fundamental or harmonic fre-
quencies. The generation of interharmonics is best illustrated using an
induction furnace example.6
Induction furnaces have been widely used to heat ferrous and non-
ferrous stocks in the forging and extruding industry. Modern induction
furnaces use electronic power converters to supply a variable frequency
to the furnace induction coil as shown in Fig. 5.38. The frequency at the
melting coil varies to match the type of material being melted and the
amount of the material in the furnace. The furnace coil and capacitor
form a resonant circuit, and the dc-to-ac inverter drives the circuit to
keep it in resonance. The inductance of the coil varies depending on the
type, temperature, and amount of material as the furnace completes
one cycle to another such as from a melt to pour cycle. This situation
results in a varying operating frequency for the furnace. The typical
range of frequencies for induction furnaces is 150 to 1200 Hz.
We now present an example. An induction furnace has a 12-pulse
current source design with reactors on the dc link to smooth the cur-
rent into the inverter as shown in Fig. 5.38. Typical characteristic har-
monics in the ac-side line currents are 11th, 13th, 23rd, 25th,…, with
some noncharacteristic harmonics such as the 5th and 7th also possi-
bly present. However, there are also currents at noninteger frequencies
due to the interaction with the inverter output frequency as the furnace
goes from one cycle to another. The switching of the inverter reflects
the frequency of the furnace circuit to the ac-side power through small
perturbations of the dc link current. This interaction results in inter-
harmonic frequencies at the ac side and bears no relation to the power
supply frequency. The interharmonics appear in pairs at the following
frequencies:
2fo ± fs, 4fo ± fs, . . .
(5.34)
where fo and fs are the furnace operating frequency and the fundamen-
tal of the ac main frequency, respectively. Thus, if the furnace operates
Fundamentals of Harmonics
221
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

at 160 Hz, the first interharmonic currents will appear at 260 and 380
Hz. The second pair of lesser magnitude will appear at 580 and 700 Hz.
A typical spectrum of induction furnace current is shown in Fig. 5.39.
In this particular example, the fifth harmonic was noncharacteristic
but was found in significant amounts in nearly all practical power sys-
tems. The interharmonic frequencies move slowly, from several sec-
onds to several minutes, through a wide frequency range as the furnace
completes its melt and pour cycle. The wide range of the resulting
interharmonics can potentially excite resonances in the power supply
system.
Our example illustrates how interharmonics are produced in modern
induction furnaces. Cycloconverters, adjustable-speed drives, induc-
tion motors with wound rotor using subsynchronous converter cas-
cades, and arcing devices also produce interharmonics in a similar
fashion.
Since interharmonics can assume any values between harmonic fre-
quencies, the interharmonic spectrum must have sufficient frequency
resolution. Thus, a single-cycle waveform sample is no longer adequate
to compute the interharmonic spectrum since it only provides a fre-
quency resolution of 50 or 60 Hz. Any frequency in between harmonic
frequencies is lost. The one-cycle waveform though is commonly used
to compute the harmonic spectrum since there is no frequency between
harmonic frequencies.
A 12- or 10-cycle waveform is then recommended for a 60- or 50-Hz
power system to achieve higher frequency resolution. The resulting fre-
quency resolution is 5 Hz.7
Impacts of interharmonics are similar to those of harmonics such as
filter overloading, overheating, power line carrier interference, ripple,
voltage fluctuation, and flicker.7,8 However, solving interharmonic
problems can be more challenging, especially when interharmonic fre-
222
Chapter Five
CONTROLLED
RECTIFIER
dc-to-ac
INVERTER
dc LINK
FURNACE
COIL
3-PHASE ac
60 Hz
1-PHASE ac
150-300  Hz
Figure 5.38
Block diagram of a modern induction furnace with a current source inverter.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

quencies vary from time to time as do those in induction furnaces.
Broadband filters are usually used to mitigate interharmonic prob-
lems. In the next chapter (Sec. 6.7), a case study of interharmonics
causing an electric clock to go faster is presented.
5.12
References
1. Energy Information Agency, A Look at Commercial Buildings in 1995: Characteristics,
Energy Consumption and Energy Expenditures, DOE/EIA-0625(95), October 1998.
2. D. E. Rice, “Adjustable-Speed Drive and Power Rectifier Harmonics. Their Effects on
Power System Components,” IEEE Trans. on Industrial Applications, IA-22(1),
January/February 1986, pp. 161–177.
3. J. M. Frank, “Origin, Development and Design of K-Factor Transformers,” in
Conference Record, 1994 IEEE Industry Applications Society Annual Meeting,
Denver, October 1994, pp. 2273–2274.
4. IEC 61000-4-7, Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC)—Part 4-7, “Testing and
Measurement Techniques—General Guide on Harmonics and Interharmonics
Measurements and Instrumentation, for Power Supply Systems and Equipment
Connected Thereto,” SC77A, 2000, Draft.
5. N. Mohan, T. M. Undeland, W. P. Robbins, Power Electronics: Converters,
Applications, and Design, 2d ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1995.
6. R. C. Dugan, L. E Conrad, “Impact of Induction Furnace Interharmonics on
Distribution Systems,” Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE Transmission and Distribution
Conference, April 1999, pp. 791–796.
7. WG1 TF3 CD for IEC 61000-1-4, Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC): “Rationale for
Limiting Power-Frequency Conducted Harmonic and Interharmonic Current
Emissions from Equipment in the Frequency Range Up to 9 kHz,” SC77A, 2001, Draft.
8. IEEE Interharmonic Task Force, “Interharmonics in Power Systems,” Cigre
36.05/CIRED 2 CC02 Voltage Quality Working Group, 1997.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
223
0
120
240
360
480
600
720
840
960
1080
1200
 0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
Frequency (Hz)
Current (A)
11th
13th
5th
2 f0 ± 60
4 f0 ± 60
Figure 5.39
Typical spectrum of induction furnace current.
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

5.13
Bibliography
Acha, Enrique, Madrigal, Manuel, Power Systems Harmonics: Computer Modelling and
Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2001.
Arrillaga, J., Watson, Neville R., Wood, Alan R., Smith, B.C., Power System Harmonic
Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1997.
Dugan, R. C., McGranaghan, M. R., Rizy, D. T., Stovall, J. P., Electric Power System
Harmonics Design Guide, ORNL/Sub/81-95011/3, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
U.S. DOE, September 1986.
224
Chapter Five
Fundamentals of Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

225
Applied Harmonics
Chapter 5 showed how harmonics are produced and how they impact
various power system components. This chapter shows ways to deal
with them, i.e., how to
■Evaluate harmonic distortion
■Properly control harmonics
■Perform a harmonic study
■Design a filter bank
This chapter will also present representative case studies.
6.1
Harmonic Distortion Evaluations
As discussed in Chap. 5, harmonic currents produced by nonlinear
loads can interact adversely with the utility supply system. The inter-
action often gives rise to voltage and current harmonic distortion
observed in many places in the system. Therefore, to limit both voltage
and current harmonic distortion, IEEE Standard 519-19922 proposes to
limit harmonic current injection from end users so that harmonic volt-
age levels on the overall power system will be acceptable if the power
system does not inordinately accentuate the harmonic currents. This
approach requires participation from both end users and utilities.1–3
1. End users.
For individual end users, IEEE Standard 519-1992
limits the level of harmonic current injection at the point of common
coupling (PCC). This is the quantity end users have control over.
Recommended limits are provided for both individual harmonic com-
ponents and the total demand distortion. The concept of PCC is illus-
Chapter6
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality

trated in Fig. 6.1. These limits are expressed in terms of a percentage
of the end user’s maximum demand current level, rather than as a per-
centage of the fundamental. This is intended to provide a common basis
for evaluation over time.
2. The utility.
Since the harmonic voltage distortion on the utility
system arises from the interaction between distorted load currents and
the utility system impedance, the utility is mainly responsible for lim-
iting the voltage distortion at the PCC. The limits are given for the
maximum individual harmonic components and for the total harmonic
distortion (THD). These values are expressed as the percentage of the
fundamental voltage. For systems below 69 kV, the THD should be less
than 5 percent. Sometimes the utility system impedance at harmonic
frequencies is determined by the resonance of power factor correction
capacitor banks. This results in a very high impedance and high har-
monic voltages. Therefore, compliance with IEEE Standard 519-1992
often means that the utility must ensure that system resonances do not
coincide with harmonic frequencies present in the load currents.
Thus, in principle, end users and utilities share responsibility for lim-
iting harmonic current injections and voltage distortion at the PCC.
Since there are two parties involved in limiting harmonic distortions,
the evaluation of harmonic distortion is divided into two parts: mea-
surements of the currents being injected by the load and calculations of
the frequency response of the system impedance. Measurements
should be taken continuously over a sufficient period of time so that
time variations and statistical characteristics of the harmonic distor-
tion can be accurately represented. Sporadic measurements should be
avoided since they do not represent harmonic characteristics accu-
rately given that harmonics are a continuous phenomenon. The mini-
mum measurement period is usually 1 week since this provides a
representative loading cycle for most industrial and commercial loads.
6.1.1
Concept of point of common coupling
Evaluations of harmonic distortion are usually performed at a point
between the end user or customer and the utility system where another
customer can be served. This point is known as the point of common
coupling.1
The PCC can be located at either the primary side or the secondary
side of the service transformer depending on whether or not multiple
customers are supplied from the transformer. In other words, if multi-
ple customers are served from the primary of the transformer, the PCC
is then located at the primary. On the other hand, if multiple customers
are served from the secondary of the transformer, the PCC is located at
the secondary. Figure 6.1 illustrates these two possibilities.
226
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Note that when the primary of the transformer is the PCC, current
measurements for verification can still be performed at the trans-
former secondary. The measurement results should be referred to the
transformer high side by the turns ratio of the transformer, and the
effect of transformer connection on the zero-sequence components must
be taken into account. For instance, a delta-wye connected transformer
will not allow zero-sequence current components to flow from the sec-
ondary to the primary system. These secondary components will be
trapped in the primary delta winding. Therefore, zero-sequence com-
Applied Harmonics
227
Customer under Study
Other Utility
Customers
Utility System
PCC
IL
Customer under Study
Other Utility
Customers
Utility System
PCC
IL
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.1
PCC selection depends on where multiple customers are served. (a) PCC at
the transformer primary where multiple customers are served. (b) PCC at the trans-
former secondary where multiple customers are served.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ponents (which are balanced triplen harmonic components) measured
on the secondary side would not be included in the evaluation for a PCC
on the primary side.
6.1.2
Harmonic evaluations on the 
utility system
Harmonic evaluations on the utility system involve procedures to
determine the acceptability of the voltage distortion for all customers.
Should the voltage distortion exceed the recommended limits, correc-
tive actions will be taken to reduce the distortion to a level within lim-
its. IEEE Standard 519-1992 provides guidelines for acceptable levels
of voltage distortion on the utility system. These are summarized in
Table 6.1. Note that the recommended limits are specified for the max-
imum individual harmonic component and for the THD.
Note that the definition of the total harmonic distortion in Table 6.1
is slightly different than the conventional definition. The THD value in
this table is expressed as a function of the nominal system rms voltage
rather than of the fundamental frequency voltage magnitude at the
time of the measurement. The definition used here allows the evalua-
tion of the voltage distortion with respect to fixed limits rather than
limits that fluctuate with the system voltage. A similar concept is
applied for the current limits.
There are two important components for limiting voltage distortion
levels on the overall utility system:
1. Harmonic currents injected from individual end users on the sys-
tem must be limited. These currents propagate toward the supply
source through the system impedance, creating voltage distortion.
Thus by limiting the amount of injected harmonic currents, the voltage
distortion can be limited as well. This is indeed the basic method of con-
trolling the overall distortion levels proposed by IEEE Standard 519-
1992.
2. The overall voltage distortion levels can be excessively high even
if the harmonic current injections are within limits. This condition
228
Chapter Six
TABLE 6.1
Harmonic Voltage Distortion Limits in Percent of
Nominal Fundamental Frequency Voltage
Bus voltage at 
Individual harmonic
Total voltage 
PCC, Vn (kV)
voltage distortion (%)
distortion, THDVn (%)
Vn  69
3.0
5.0
69  Vn  161
1.5
2.5
Vn  161
1.0
1.5
SOURCE: IEEE Standard 519-1992, table 11.1.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

occurs primarily when one of the harmonic current frequencies is close
to a system resonance frequency. This can result in unacceptable volt-
age distortion levels at some system locations. The highest voltage dis-
tortion will generally occur at a capacitor bank that participates in the
resonance. This location can be remote from the point of injection.
Voltage limit evaluation procedure.
The overall procedure for utility sys-
tem harmonic evaluation is described here. This procedure is applica-
ble to both existing and planned installations. Figure 6.2 shows a
flowchart of the evaluation procedure.
1. Characterization of harmonic sources.
Characteristics of har-
monic sources on the system are best determined with measurements
for existing installations. These measurements should be performed at
facilities suspected of having offending nonlinear loads. The duration
of measurements is usually at least 1 week so that all the cyclical load
Applied Harmonics
229
C
Start
Existing
or
planned facility
Characterize
harmonic sources
using
manufacturer’s data
Harmonic
measurements
Model the system,
and
determine system
resonance condition
Evaluate distortion
levels
C
Voltage
limits
exceeded?
Evaluate
harmonic
control scheme
DONE
At the
utility side
At the
customer side
Existing
Planned or new
Yes
No
Figure 6.2
Voltage limit evaluation procedure.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

variations can be captured. For new or planned installations, harmonic
characteristics provided by manufacturers may suffice.
2. System modeling.
The system response to the harmonic currents
injected at end-user locations or by nonlinear devices on the power sys-
tem is determined by developing a computer model of the system.
Distribution and transmission system models are developed as
described in Sec. 6.4.
3. System frequency response.
Possible system resonances should
be determined by a frequency scan of the entire power delivery system.
Frequency scans are performed for all capacitor bank configurations of
interest since capacitor configuration is the main variable that will
affect the resonant frequencies.
4. Evaluate expected distortion levels.
Even with system resonance
close to characteristic harmonics, the voltage distortion levels around
the system may be acceptable. On distribution systems, most reso-
nances are significantly damped by the resistances on the system,
which reduces magnification of the harmonic currents. The estimated
harmonic sources are used with the system configuration yielding the
worst-case frequency-response characteristics to compute the highest
expected harmonic distortion. This will indicate whether or not har-
monic mitigation measures are necessary.
5. Evaluate harmonic control scheme.
Harmonic control options
consist of controlling the harmonic injection from nonlinear loads,
changing the system frequency-response characteristics, or blocking
the flow of harmonic currents by applying harmonic filters. Design of
passive filters for some systems can be difficult because the system
characteristics are constantly changing as loads vary and capacitor
banks are switched. Section 6.2 discusses harmonic controls in detail.
6.1.3
Harmonic evaluation for end-user
facilities
Harmonic problems are more common at end-user facilities than on the
utility supply system. Most nonlinear loads are located within end-user
facilities, and the highest voltage distortion levels occur close to har-
monic sources. The most significant problems occur when there are
nonlinear loads and power factor correction capacitors that result in
resonant conditions.
IEEE Standard 519-1992 establishes harmonic current distortion
limits at the PCC. The limits, summarized in Table 6.2, are dependent
on the customer load in relation to the system short-circuit capacity at
the PCC.
The variables and additional restrictions to the limits given in Table
6.2 are:
230
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Ih is the magnitude of individual harmonic components (rms amps).
■ISC is the short-circuit current at the PCC.
■IL is the fundamental component of the maximum demand load cur-
rent at the PCC. It can be calculated as the average of the maximum
monthly demand currents for the previous 12 months or it may have
to be estimated.
■The individual harmonic component limits apply to the odd-har-
monic components. Even-harmonic components are limited to 25 per-
cent of the limits.
■Current distortion which results in a dc offset at the PCC is not
allowed.
■The total demand distortion (TDD) is expressed in terms of the max-
imum demand load current, i.e.,
TDD 
 100%
(6.1)
■If the harmonic-producing loads consist of power converters with
pulse number q higher than 6, the limits indicated in Table 6.2 are
increased by a factor equal to q/6
 .

2
I 2
h


IL
Applied Harmonics
231
TABLE 6.2
Harmonic Current Distortion Limits (Ih) in Percent of IL
Vn  69 kV
ISC/IL
h  11
11  h  17
17  h  23 
23  h  35 
35  h
TDD
20
4.0
2.0
1.5
0.6
0.3
5.0
20–50
7.0
3.5
2.5
1.0
0.5
8.0
50–100
10.0
4.5
4.0
1.5
0.7
12.0
100–1000
12.0
5.5
5.0
2.0
1.0
15.0
1000
15.0
7.0
6.0
2.5
1.4
20.0
69 kV  Vn  161 kV
20*
2.0
1.0
0.75
0.3
0.15
2.5
20–50
3.5
1.75
1.25
0.5
0.25
4.0
50–100
5.0
2.25
2.0
0.75
0.35
6.0
100–1000
6.0
2.75
2.5
1.0
0.5
7.5
1000
7.5
3.5
3.0
1.25
0.7
10.0
Vn  161 kV
50
2.0
1.0
0.75
0.3
0.15
2.5
50
3.0
1.50
1.15
0.45
0.22
3.75
*All power generation equipment applications are limited to these values of current distor-
tion regard less of the actual short-circuit current ratio ISC/IL.
SOURCE: IEEE Standard 519-1992, tables 10.3, 10.4, 10.5.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

In computing the short-circuit current at the PCC, the normal system
conditions that result in minimum short-circuit capacity at the PCC
should be used since this condition results in the most severe system
impacts.
A procedure to determine the short-circuit ratio is as follows:
1. Determine the three-phase short-circuit duty ISC at the PCC. This
value may be obtained directly from the utility and expressed in
amperes. If the short-circuit duty is given in megavoltamperes, con-
vert it to an amperage value using the following expression:
ISC 
A
(6.2)
where MVA and kV represent the three-phase short-circuit capacity
in megavoltamperes and the line-to-line voltage at the PCC in kV,
respectively.
2. Find the load average kilowatt demand PD over the most recent 12
months. This can be found from billing information.
3. Convert the average kilowatt demand to the average demand cur-
rent in amperes using the following expression:
IL 
A
(6.3)
where PF is the average billed power factor.
4. The short-circuit ratio is now determined by:
Short-circuit ratio 
(6.4)
This is the short-circuit ratio used to determine the limits on har-
monic currents in IEEE Standard 519-1992.
In some instances, the average of the maximum demand load current
at the PCC for the previous 12 months is not available. In such cir-
cumstances, this value must be estimated based on the predicted load
profiles. For seasonal loads, the average should be over the maximum
loads only.
Current limit evaluation procedure.
This procedure involves evaluation
of the harmonic generation characteristics from individual end-user
loads with respect to IEEE Standard 519-1992 limits. However, special
consideration is required when considering power factor correction
equipment.
ISC

IL
kW

PF 3 kV
1000  MVA

3 kV
232
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

1. Define the PCC. For industrial and commercial end users, the PCC is
usually at the primary side of a service transformer supplying the facility.
2. Calculate the short-circuit ratio at the PCC and find the corre-
sponding limits on individual harmonics and on the TDD.
3. Characterize the harmonic sources. Individual nonlinear loads in the
facility combine to form the overall level of harmonic current generation.
The best way to characterize harmonic current in an existing facility is to
perform measurements at the PCC over a period of time (at least 1 week).
For planning studies, the harmonic current can be estimated knowing the
characteristics of individual nonlinear loads and the percentage of the
total load made up by these nonlinear loads. Typical characteristics of indi-
vidual harmonic sources were presented in Secs. 5.6 and 5.7.
4. Evaluate harmonic current levels with respect to current limits
using Table 6.2. If these values exceed limits, the facility does not meet
the limit recommended by IEEE Standard 519-1992 and mitigation
may be required.
6.2
Principles for Controlling Harmonics
Harmonic distortion is present to some degree on all power systems.
Fundamentally, one needs to control harmonics only when they become
a problem. There are three common causes of harmonic problems:
1. The source of harmonic currents is too great.
2. The path in which the currents flow is too long (electrically), result-
ing in either high voltage distortion or telephone interference.
3. The response of the system magnifies one or more harmonics to a
greater degree than can be tolerated.
When a problem occurs, the basic options for controlling harmonics are:
1. Reduce the harmonic currents produced by the load.
2. Add filters to either siphon the harmonic currents off the system,
block the currents from entering the system, or supply the harmonic
currents locally.
3. Modify the frequency response of the system by filters, inductors, or
capacitors.
These options are described in Secs. 6.2.1 through 6.2.3.
6.2.1
Reducing harmonic currents in loads
There is often little that can be done with existing load equipment to
significantly reduce the amount of harmonic current it is producing
unless it is being misoperated. While an overexcited transformer can be
brought back into normal operation by lowering the applied voltage to
Applied Harmonics
233
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the correct range, arcing devices and most electronic power converters
are locked into their designed characteristics.
PWM drives that charge the dc bus capacitor directly from the line
without any intentional impedance are one exception to this. Adding a
line reactor or transformer in series (as shown in Sec. 5.7.1) will signifi-
cantly reduce harmonics, as well as provide transient protection benefits.
Transformer connections can be employed to reduce harmonic cur-
rents in three-phase systems. Phase-shifting half of the 6-pulse power
converters in a plant load by 30° can approximate the benefits of 12-
pulse loads by dramatically reducing the fifth and seventh harmonics.
Delta-connected transformers can block the flow of zero-sequence har-
monics (typically triplens) from the line. Zigzag and grounding trans-
formers can shunt the triplens off the line.
Purchasing specifications can go a long way toward preventing har-
monic problems by penalizing bids from vendors with high harmonic
content. This is particularly important for such loads as high-efficiency
lighting.
6.2.2
Filtering
The shunt filter works by short-circuiting harmonic currents as close to
the source of distortion as practical. This keeps the currents out of the
supply system. This is the most common type of filtering applied
because of economics and because it also tends to correct the load power
factor as well as remove the harmonic current.
Another approach is to apply a series filter that blocks the harmonic
currents. This is a parallel-tuned circuit that offers a high impedance
to the harmonic current. It is not often used because it is difficult to
insulate and the load voltage is very distorted. One common applica-
tion is in the neutral of a grounded-wye capacitor to block the flow of
triplen harmonics while still retaining a good ground at fundamental
frequency.
Active filters work by electronically supplying the harmonic compo-
nent of the current into a nonlinear load. More information on filtering
is given in Sec. 6.5.
6.2.3
Modifying the system frequency
response
There are a number of methods to modify adverse system responses to
harmonics:
1. Add a shunt filter. Not only does this shunt a troublesome harmonic
current off the system, but it completely changes the system
response, most often, but not always, for the better.
234
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2. Add a reactor to detune the system. Harmful resonances generally
occur between the system inductance and shunt power factor cor-
rection capacitors. The reactor must be added between the capacitor
and the supply system source. One method is to simply put a reac-
tor in series with the capacitor to move the system resonance with-
out actually tuning the capacitor to create a filter. Another is to add
reactance in the line.
3. Change the capacitor size. This is often one of the least expensive
options for both utilities and industrial customers.
4. Move a capacitor to a point on the system with a different short-cir-
cuit impedance or higher losses. This is also an option for utilities
when a new bank causes telephone interference—moving the bank
to another branch of the feeder may very well resolve the problem.
This is frequently not an option for industrial users because the
capacitor cannot be moved far enough to make a difference.
5. Remove the capacitor and simply accept the higher losses, lower
voltage, and power factor penalty. If technically feasible, this is occa-
sionally the best economic choice.
6.3
Where to Control Harmonics
The strategies for mitigating harmonic distortion problems differ
somewhat by location. The following techniques are ways for control-
ling harmonic distortion on both the utility distribution feeder and end-
user power system.
6.3.1
On utility distribution feeders
The X/R ratio of a utility distribution feeder is generally low. Therefore,
the magnification of harmonics by resonance with feeder banks is usu-
ally minor in comparison to what might be found inside an industrial
facility. Utility distribution engineers are accustomed to placing feeder
banks where they are needed without concern about harmonics.
However, voltage distortion from the resonance of feeder banks may
exceed limits in a few cases and require mitigation. When problems do
occur, the usual strategy is to first attempt a solution by moving the
offending bank or changing the capacitor size or neutral connection.
Some harmonic problems associated with feeder capacitor banks are
due to increasing the triplen harmonics in the neutral circuit of the
feeder. To change the flow of zero-sequence harmonic currents, changes
are made to the neutral connection of wye-connected banks. To block
the flow, the neutral is allowed to float. In other cases, it is more advan-
Applied Harmonics
235
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tageous to aid the flow by putting a reactor in the neutral to convert the
bank into a tuned resonant shunt for a zero-sequence harmonic.
Harmonic problems on distribution feeders often exist only at light
load. The voltage rises, causing the distribution transformers to pro-
duce more harmonic currents and there is less load to damp out reso-
nance. Switching the capacitors off at this time frequently solves the
problem.
Should harmonic currents from widely dispersed sources require
filtering on distribution feeders, the general idea is to distribute a
few filters toward the ends of the feeder. While this is not done fre-
quently, the number of feeder filter installations is growing. Figure
6.3 shows one example of a filter installed on an overhead distribu-
tion feeder. This shortens the average path for the harmonic cur-
rents, reducing the opportunity for telephone interference and
reducing the harmonic voltage drop in the lines. The filters appear as
nearly a short circuit to at least one harmonic component. This keeps
the voltage distortion on the feeder to a minimum. With the ends of
the feeder “nailed down” by filters with respect to the voltage distor-
tion, it is more difficult for the voltage distortion to rise above limits
elsewhere.
Harmonic flow studies should always be performed when large
capacitor banks are installed in distribution substations. One cannot
count on system losses to damp out resonance at this point on the sys-
tem, and magnification by resonance can be severe.
236
Chapter Six
Figure 6.3
Filter installation on an overhead distribution feeder. Oil-insulated,
iron-core reactors are mounted on a separate pole from the capacitor bank and
switches. (Courtesy of Gilbert Electrical Systems.)
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

6.3.2
In end-user facilities
When harmonic problems arise in an end-user facility, the first step is
to determine if the main cause is resonance with power factor capaci-
tors in the facility. When it is, first attempt a simple solution by using
a different capacitor size. With automatic power factor controllers, it
may be possible to select a control scheme that avoids the configuration
that causes problems. In other cases, there will be so many capacitors
switched at random with loads that it will be impossible to avoid reso-
nant conditions. Filtering will be necessary.
Installation of filters on end-user low-voltage systems is generally
more practical and economical than on utility distribution systems.
The criteria for filter installation are more easily met, and filtering
equipment is more readily available on the market.
When the magnitude of harmonic currents injected by loads is exces-
sive, industrial users should also investigate means of reducing har-
monics by using different transformer connections and line chokes. In
office buildings, zigzag transformers and triplen harmonic filters can
reduce the impact of triplen harmonic currents on neutral circuits.
Studies should be performed on all capacitors installed on the main
bus in industrial systems. At this location, there are insufficient line
losses to dampen resonance. Thus, when resonance coincides with a
harmonic frequency that is a strong component in the load current, the
resulting voltage distortion is often severe.
Resonance problems are often less severe when capacitors are
located out on the plant floor on motors and in motor control centers.
This also has the benefit of reducing the losses in the system compared
to simply placing the capacitor on the main bus. Of course, this solution
can be more costly than use of a single capacitor on the main bus due
to the numerous installations required. This assumes that the cables
are sufficiently long to introduce enough resistance into the circuit to
dampen the resonance. In plants with short cables, it may not be pos-
sible to achieve significant harmonic reduction benefit.
6.4
Harmonic Studies
Harmonic studies play an important role in characterizing and under-
standing the extent of harmonic problems. Harmonic studies are often
performed when
1. Finding a solution to an existing harmonic problem
2. Installing large capacitor banks on utility distribution systems or
industrial power systems
3. Installing large nonlinear devices or loads
Applied Harmonics
237
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

4. Designing a harmonic filter
5. Converting a power factor capacitor bank to a harmonic filter
Harmonic studies provide a means to evaluate various possible solu-
tions and their effectiveness under a wide range of conditions before
implementing a final solution. In this section, methods for carrying out
harmonic studies are presented.
6.4.1
Harmonic study procedure
The ideal procedure for performing a power systems harmonics study
can be summarized as follows:
1. Determine the objectives of the study. This is important to keep the
investigation on track. For example, the objective might be to iden-
tify what is causing an existing problem and solve it. Another might
be to determine if a new plant expansion containing equipment such
as adjustable-speed drives and capacitors is likely to have problems.
2. If the system is complex, make a premeasurement computer simu-
lation based on the best information available. Measurements are
expensive in terms of labor, equipment, and possible disruption to
plant operations. It will generally be economical to have a good idea
what to look for and where to look before beginning the measure-
ments.
3. Make measurements of the existing harmonic conditions, charac-
terizing sources of harmonic currents and system bus voltage dis-
tortion.
4. Calibrate the computer model using the measurements.
5. Study the new circuit condition or existing problem.
6. Develop solutions (filter, etc.) and investigate possible adverse sys-
tem interactions. Also, check the sensitivity of the results to impor-
tant variables.
7. After the installation of proposed solutions, perform monitoring to
verify the correct operation of the system.
Admittedly, it is not always possible to perform each of these steps ide-
ally. The most often omitted steps are one, or both, measurement steps
due to the cost of engineering time, travel, and equipment charges. An
experienced analyst may be able to solve a problem without measure-
ments, but it is strongly recommended that the initial measurements
be made if at all possible because there are many unpleasant surprises
lurking in the shadows of harmonics analysis.
238
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

6.4.2
Developing a system model
There are two fundamental issues that need to be considered in devel-
oping a system model for harmonic simulation studies. The first issue
is the extent of the system model to be included in the simulation.
Secondly, one must decide whether the model should be represented as
a single-phase equivalent or a full three-phase model.
As an example of model extent, suppose a utility plans to install a large
capacitor bank on a distribution feeder and would like to evaluate the fre-
quency response associated with the bank. Representing the entire dis-
tribution system is usually not practical because it would be
time-consuming to develop the model and it would strain computational
resources to run simulations. One approach would be to start developing
a model one or two buses back from the bus of interest and include every-
thing in between. Another approach would be to start with a small sim-
ple circuit that accurately represents the phenomena and add more of the
system details to determine the impact on the solution result. At the point
when adding more system details does not change the analysis results,
the physical system is sufficiently represented by the simulation model.
In modeling distribution systems for harmonic studies, it is usually
sufficient to represent the upstream transmission system with a short-
circuit equivalent at the high-voltage side of the substation trans-
former. The leakage impedance of the transformer dominates the
short-circuit equivalent and effectively isolates the transmission and
distribution for many studies. However, if there is a capacitor bank
near the high-voltage side of the transformer, part of the transmission
system must be modeled to include the capacitor bank. The combina-
tion of the transformer and the capacitor bank may behave as a filter
for some frequency as seen from the low-voltage side of the trans-
former.
Distribution system components downstream from the substation
transformer (or at the low-voltage side) such as feeder lines, capacitor
banks, key service transformers, and end-user capacitor banks must be
represented. Since the feeder capacitor banks dominate the system
capacitance, it is usually acceptable to neglect capacitance from over-
head feeder lines. However, if there is a significant amount of UD cable,
cable capacitance should be represented, especially if the study is con-
cerned with higher-order harmonics.
The analyst must then decide if the model should be represented as
a complete three-phase model or a single-phase equivalent. A single-
phase equivalent model is generally simpler and less complicated to
develop compared to a three-phase model. However, it is often inade-
quate to analyze unbalanced phenomena or systems with numerous
single-phase loads.
Applied Harmonics
239
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Fortunately, there is a rule that permits the simplified positive-
sequence modeling for many three-phase industrial loads. Determining
the response of the system to positive-sequence harmonics is straight-
forward since both utility and industrial power engineers are accus-
tomed to doing such modeling in their load flow and voltage drop
analyses. The rule may be simply stated:
When there is a delta winding in a transformer anywhere in series with
the harmonic source and the power system, only the positive-sequence cir-
cuit need be represented to determine the system response. It is impossi-
ble for zero-sequence harmonics to be present; they are blocked.
Figure 6.4 illustrates this principle, showing what models apply to dif-
ferent parts of the system.
Both the positive- and negative-sequence networks are generally
assumed to have the same response to harmonics. Sometimes mea-
surements will show triplen harmonics in the upstream from a delta
winding. One normally assumes these harmonics are zero sequence.
They may be, depending on what other sources are in system. However,
they can also be due to unbalanced harmonic sources, one example of
which would be an arc furnace. Only the triplens that are in phase are
zero sequence and are blocked by the delta winding. Therefore, it is
common to include triplen harmonics when performing analysis using
a positive-sequence model.
The symmetrical component technique fails to yield an advantage
when analyzing four-wire utility distribution feeders with numerous sin-
gle-phase loads. Both the positive- and zero-sequence networks come
into play. It is generally impractical to consider analyzing the system
240
Chapter Six
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE
SEQUENCE ONLY
3-PHASE
MODEL
REQUIRED
1-PHASE LOADS
ALL SEQUENCES
POSITIVE-SEQUENCE MODEL
SUFFICIENT
Figure 6.4
Effects of transformer connection on the modeling requirements for
analyzing harmonic flows in networks.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

manually, and most computer programs capable of accurately modeling
these systems simply set up the coupled three-phase equations and solve
them directly. Fortunately, some computer tools now make it almost as
easy to develop a three-phase model as to make a single-phase equiva-
lent. It takes no more time to solve the complete three-phase model than
to solve the sequence networks because they would have to be coupled
also. Not only does the symmetrical component technique fail to yield an
advantage in this case, but analysts often make errors and inadvertently
violate the assumptions of the method. It is not generally recommended
that harmonic analysis of unbalanced circuits be done using symmetri-
cal components. It should be attempted only by those who are absolutely
certain of their understanding of the method and its assumptions.
6.4.3
Modeling harmonic sources
Most harmonic flow analysis on power systems is performed using
steady-state, linear circuit solution techniques. Harmonic sources,
which are nonlinear elements, are generally considered to be injection
sources into the linear network models. They can be represented as
current injection sources or voltage sources.
For most harmonic flow studies, it is suitable to treat harmonic
sources as simple sources of harmonic currents. This is illustrated in
Fig. 6.5 where an electronic power converter is replaced with a current
source in the equivalent circuit. The voltage distortion at the service
bus is generally relatively low, less than 5 percent. Therefore, the cur-
rent distortion for many nonlinear devices is relatively constant and
independent of distortion in the supply system.
Applied Harmonics
241
Nonlinear Load
Current
Source
Equivalent Circuit
One-Line Diagram
Figure 6.5
Representing a nonlinear load with a harmonic current
source for analysis.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Values of injected current should be determined by measurement. In
the absence of measurements and published data, it is common to
assume that the harmonic content is inversely proportional to the har-
monic number. That is, the fifth-harmonic current is one-fifth, or 20
percent, of the fundamental, etc. This is derived from the Fourier series
for a square wave, which is at the foundation of many nonlinear
devices. However, it does not apply very well to the newer technology
PWM drives and switch-mode power supplies, which have a much
higher harmonic content. Table 6.3 shows typical values to assume for
analysis of several types of devices.
When the system is near resonance, a simple current source model
will give an excessively high prediction of voltage distortion. The model
tries to inject a constant current into a high impedance, which is not a
valid representation of reality. The harmonic current will not remain
constant at a high voltage distortion. Often, this is inconsequential
because the most important thing is to know that the system cannot be
successfully operated in resonance, which is readily observable from
the simple model. Once the resonance is eliminated by, for example,
adding a filter, the model will give a realistic answer.
For the cases where a more accurate answer is required during res-
onant conditions, a more sophisticated model must be used. For many
power system devices, a Thevenin or Norton equivalent is adequate
(see Fig. 6.6). The additional impedance moderates the response of the
parallel resonant circuit.
A Thevenin equivalent is obtained in a straightforward manner for
many nonlinear loads. For example, an arc furnace is well represented
by a square-wave voltage of peak magnitude approximately 50 percent
of the nominal ac system voltage. The series impedance is simply the
short-circuit impedance of the furnace transformer and leads (the lead
242
Chapter Six
TABLE 6.3
Typical Percent Harmonic Distortion of Common
Harmonic Sources: Odd Harmonics, 1 through 13
Harmonic
Six-pulse ASD
PWM drive
Arc lighting
SMPS
1
100
100
100
100
3
20*
70
5
18
90
7
40
7
12
80
3
15
9
2.4*
7
11
6
75
1.8
5
13
4
70
0.8
3
*For single-phase or unbalanced three-phase modeling; otherwise assume
triplen is zero.
ASD  adjustable-speed drive, PWM  pulse-width modulated,
SMPS  switch-mode power supply.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

impedance is the larger of the two). Unfortunately, it is difficult to deter-
mine clear-cut equivalent impedances for many nonlinear devices. In
these cases, a detailed simulation of the internals of the harmonic-pro-
ducing load is necessary. This can be done with computer programs that
iterate on the solution or through detailed time-domain analysis.
Fortunately, it is seldom essential to obtain such great accuracy dur-
ing resonant conditions and analysts do not often have to take these
measures. However, modeling arcing devices with a Thevenin model is
recommended regardless of need.
6.4.4
Computer tools for harmonics
analysis
The preceding discussion has given the reader an idea of the types of
functions that must be performed for harmonics analysis of power sys-
tems. It should be rather obvious that for anything but the simplest of
circuits, a sophisticated computer program is required. The character-
istics of such programs and the heritage of some popular analysis tools
are described here.
First, it should be noted that one circuit appears frequently in sim-
ple industrial systems that does lend itself to manual calculations (Fig.
6.7). It is basically a one-bus circuit with one capacitor. Two things may
be done relatively easily:
1. Determine the resonant frequency.
If the resonant frequency is
near a potentially damaging harmonic, either the capacitor must be
changed or a filter designed.
Applied Harmonics
243
L
R
C
Ih
Ih
OR
Vh
EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT
Figure 6.6
Replacing the simple current source model with a
Thevenin or Norton equivalent for better source models of resonant
conditions.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2. Determine an estimate of the voltage distortion due to the current Ih.
The voltages Vh are given by
Vh 
 Ih
(6.5)
where   2	 (hf1)
h  2, 3, 4, …
f1  fundamental frequency of power system
Given that the resonant frequency is not near a significant harmonic
and that projected voltage distortion is low, the application will proba-
bly operate successfully.
Unfortunately, not all practical cases can be represented with such a
simple circuit. In fact, adding just one more bus with a capacitor to the
simple circuit in Fig. 6.7 makes the problem a real challenge to even
the most skilled analysts. However, a computer can perform the chore
in milliseconds.
To use the computer tools commonly available, the analyst must
describe the circuit configuration, loads, and the sources to the pro-
gram. Data that must be collected include
■Line and transformer impedances
■Transformer connections
■Capacitor values and locations (critical)
■Harmonic spectra for nonlinear loads
■Power source voltages
These values are entered into the program, which automatically
adjusts impedances for frequency and computes the harmonic flow
throughout the system.
R 
 jL

1  2LC 
 jRC
244
Chapter Six
L
R
HARMONIC
SOURCE
C
Ih
h = 2, 3, 4, ...
EQUIVALENT CIRCUIT
Figure 6.7
A simple circuit that
may be analyzed manually.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Capabilities for harmonics analysis programs.
Acceptable computer soft-
ware for harmonics analysis of power systems should have the follow-
ing characteristics:
1. It should be capable of handling large networks of at least several
hundred nodes.
2. It should be capable of handling multiphase models of arbitrary
structure. Not all circuits, particularly those on utility distribution
feeders, are amenable to accurate solution by balanced, positive-
sequence models.
3. It should also be capable of modeling systems with positive-
sequence models. When there can be no zero-sequence harmonics,
there’s no need to build a full three-phase model.
4. It should be able to perform a frequency scan at small intervals of
frequency (e.g., 10 Hz) to develop the system frequency-response
characteristics necessary to identify resonances.
5. It should be able to perform simultaneous solution of numerous
harmonic sources to estimate the actual current and voltage dis-
tortion.
6. It should have built-in models of common harmonic sources.
7. It should allow both current source and voltage source models of
harmonic sources.
8. It should be able to automatically adjust phase angles of the
sources based on the fundamental frequency phase angles.
9. It should be able to model any transformer connection.
10. It should be able to display the results in a meaningful and 
user-friendly manner.
6.4.5
Harmonic analysis by computer—
historical perspective
The most common type of computer analysis of power systems per-
formed today is some form of power flow calculation. Most power engi-
neers have some experience with this class of tool. Other common
computer tools include short-circuit programs and, at least for trans-
mission systems, dynamics (transient stability) programs. Harmonics
and electromagnetic transients tools have traditionally been in the
domain of specialists due to the modeling complexities.
While power flow tools are familiar, their formulation is generally
unsuitable for harmonics analysis. Of the tools in common usage, the
Applied Harmonics
245
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

circuit model in short-circuit programs is closer to what is needed for
harmonic flow analysis in networks. In fact, prior to the advent of spe-
cial power systems harmonic analysis tools, many analysts would use
short-circuit programs to compute harmonic distortion, manually
adjusting the impedances for frequency. This is an interesting learning
experience for the student, but not one that the practitioner will want
to repeat often. Of course, one could also perform the analysis in the
time domain using electromagnetic transients programs, but this gen-
erally is more time-consuming and is excessive for most problems.
Today, most power system harmonics analysis is performed in the sinu-
soidal steady state using computer programs specially developed for the
purpose. It is encouraging to see many vendors of power system analysis
software providing some harmonics analysis capabilities in their pack-
ages, although the main application in the package may be a power flow
program. It is useful to see how this has evolved. Unlike power flow algo-
rithms, few of the developers have written technical papers documenting
their efforts. Therefore, it is difficult to trace the history of harmonics
analysis in power systems through the literature. This book gives us the
opportunity to acknowledge the contributions of several of the pioneers in
this field, and this will help the reader understand the history behind
some of the major computer tools available today.
Prior to the widespread use of computers for harmonics analysis,
power systems harmonic studies were frequently performed on analog
simulators such as a transient network analyzer (TNA). The few TNAs
in the United States in the mid-1970s were located at large equipment
manufacturers, primarily at General Electric Co., Westinghouse
Electric, and McGraw-Edison Power Systems. Because of the inconve-
nience and high cost, harmonic studies were generally performed only
on very special cases such as large arc furnace installations that might
impact utility transmission systems. TNAs usually had at least two
variable-frequency sources. Therefore, the general procedure was to
use one source for the power frequency and the second source to repre-
sent the nonlinear load, one frequency at a time. One tricky part of this
procedure was to sweep the frequency through system resonances fast
enough to avoid burning up the power supply or damaging inductors
and capacitors.
Our involvement in harmonics analysis began in 1975, when author
Dugan, then with McGraw-Edison, constructed the first electronic arc
model for a TNA to eliminate the need to use the second source.4 In that
same year, to overcome the limitations of harmonic analysis by analog
simulator, Dugan teamed up with Dr. Sarosh N. Talukdar and William
L. Sponsler at McGraw-Edison to develop one of the first commercial
computer programs specifically designed to automate analysis of har-
monic flows on large-scale power systems. Dubbed the Network
246
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Frequency Response Analysis Program (NFRAP), it was developed for
the Virginia Electric Power Company to study the impacts of adding
220-kV capacitor banks on the transmission system. These were some
of the first capacitors applied at this voltage level.
The NFRAP program techniques, which are direct nodal admittance
matrix solution techniques that treat nonlinearities as sources,
evolved into what is probably the most prolific family of harmonic
analysis programs. From 1977 to 1979, EPRI sponsored an investiga-
tion of harmonics on utility distribution feeders.5,6 One of the products
of this research was the Distribution Feeder Harmonics Analysis pro-
gram. It was the first program designed specifically for analyzing har-
monics on unbalanced distribution systems and had specific models of
power systems elements to help the user develop models. It became
the prototype for the modern harmonic analysis program. Key investi-
gators on this project, RP 1024-1, were Robert E. Owen and author
McGranaghan, and the key software designers were again Dugan and
Sponsler.
The next generation of software tool based on the NFRAP program
methodology was the McGraw-Edison Harmonic Analysis Program
(MEHAP), under development from 1980 to 1984. It was written in
Fortran for minicomputers and had the distinction of being interactive
with graphical output. All previous efforts had been batch-mode pro-
grams with tabular output. For its time, it fit the definition of being
user-friendly. The developers included Dugan, McGranaghan, and Jack
A. King.
At about this same time, however, the personal computer (PC) revo-
lution took place. Erich W. Gunther recoded the algorithms in the
Pascal language and created the V-HARM program.7 To our knowledge,
this was the first commercial harmonic analysis program written
expressly for the PC environment. It has proven to be a very reliable
and durable program and can be licensed today from Cooper Power
Systems. Gunther subsequently has written the latest generation in
this heritage of harmonic analysis tools in the C

 language for the
Microsoft Windows environment. It is called the SuperHarm program
and can be licensed from Electrotek Concepts, Inc.
The CYMHARMO program was developed first at Hydro Quebec’s
Research Institute (IREQ) in Montreal in 1983 and now can be licensed
through CYME International Inc. The program was originally written
in Fortran for the mainframe and was ported to the PC shortly after-
ward in 1984. It is now written in a mixture of Fortran and C lan-
guages. The principal authors of the software are Dr. Chinh Nguyen
and Dr. Ali Moshref. The Canadian Electric Association (CEA) has sup-
ported the development of this program, which uses analysis tech-
niques similar to the previously mentioned programs.
Applied Harmonics
247
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Beginning in 1981, EPRI also sponsored the development of the
HARMFLO program, which takes a different approach to the network
solution. Drs. G. L. Hedyt, D. Xia, and W. Mack Grady8,9 developed the
program at Purdue University and based it on the Newton-Raphson
power flow techniques. The program was the first to adjust the har-
monic current output of the load for the harmonic voltage distortion.
The Fortran program was originally developed for mainframe batch
computers and is now also available for the PC.
Of course, harmonics problems can be solved on electromagnetic tran-
sients analysis programs such as the EMTP, originally developed by the
Bonneville Power Administration. Another one is the PSCAD/EMTDC
program from the Manitoba HVDC Research Centre. The special-pur-
pose steady-state programs are generally more efficient for the usual
power system harmonics problems, but occasionally, a very difficult
problem will arise that requires simulation in the time domain.
The contributions of these pioneers have made it much easier for
subsequent generations of power engineers to perform harmonics
analysis on power systems, and harmonics analysis is now becoming
commonplace.
6.5
Devices for Controlling Harmonic
Distortion
There are a number of devices available to control harmonic distortion.
They can be as simple as a capacitor bank or a line reactor, or as com-
plex as an active filter.
As described in Sec. 6.2, a simple mitigation action such as adding,
resizing, or relocating a shunt capacitor bank can effectively modify an
unfavorable system frequency response, and thus bring the harmonic
distortion to an acceptable level. Similarly, a reactor can perform the
same function by detuning the system off harmful resonances. The
effectiveness of such simple solutions in controlling harmonic distor-
tion should be explored prior to considering a more complex device.
The following material first discusses the effectiveness of a simple in-
line reactor, or choke, in mitigating harmonic distortion. Then, two
general classes of harmonic filters, i.e., passive and active filters, are
discussed. The former are based on passive elements, while the latter
are based on power electronic devices.
6.5.1
In-line reactors or chokes
A simple, but often successful, method to control harmonic distortion
generated by adjustable-speed drives involves a relatively small reac-
tor, or choke, inserted at the line input side of the drive. This is partic-
ularly effective for PWM-type drives.
248
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The inductance slows the rate at which the capacitor on the dc bus
can be charged and forces the drive to draw current over a longer time
period. The net effect is a lower-magnitude current with much less har-
monic content while still delivering the same energy.
A typical 3 percent input choke can reduce the harmonic current dis-
tortion for a PWM-type drive from approximately 80 to 40 percent. This
impressive harmonic reduction is illustrated in Fig. 6.8. Additional
harmonic reduction is rather limited when the choke size is increased
beyond 3 percent. The choke size is computed on the drive kVA base.
Figure 6.9 shows typical line chokes used in 480-V ASD applications.
Applied Harmonics
249
Choke
(0 to 5)% Z
(on ASD kVA)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Line Input Choke (% on Drive Base)
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
Input Current Distortion (%)
Figure 6.8
Harmonic reduction for a PWM-type ASD as a function of input choke
size.
Figure 6.9
Three-phase line chokes for ASD applica-
tions. (Courtesy of MTE Corp.)
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Figure 6.10 compares the effectiveness of a 3 percent choke in reduc-
ing harmonic current distortion to the condition without a choke for
various ASD sizes (ASD sizes are normalized to the service transformer
kVA). Representative waveforms for each end of the range are shown.
The larger waveform is without the choke. As is clear from Fig. 6.10, a
substantial improvement is achieved by inserting a choke in the ASD
line. The current THD drops from the 80 to 120 percent range down to
approximately 40 percent. Better reduction is obtained when the size
of the ASD is significantly smaller than the service transformer. When
the size of the ASD is 5 percent of the transformer, the current THD
drops from 125 to 40 percent.
It is also important to note that there are other advantages of the
choke in ASD applications. The effect of slowing the dc capacitor charg-
ing rate also makes the choke very effective in blocking some high-fre-
quency transients. This helps avoid nuisance drive tripping during
capacitor energization operations on the utility system.
Isolation transformers can provide the same benefit as a choke but
may be more costly. However, isolation transformers with multiple 
drives offer the advantage of creating effective 12-pulse operation.
Figure 6.11 illustrates this concept.
A 12-pulse configuration can be achieved by supplying one drive
through a delta-wye connected transformer, and another drive through
a delta-delta connected transformer. Figure 6.11 shows the current
waveforms for two separate six-pulse ASDs. When the two waveforms
250
Chapter Six
No Choke
Transformer
5% Z
(on xfmr kVA)
Choke
3% Z
(on ASD
kVA)
Choke
ASD
130%
110%
90%
70%
50%
30%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
ASD kVA
Transformer kVA
ITHD
I(t) at 5% kVA ratio
I(t) at 33% kVA ratio
Figure 6.10
Effect of ac line chokes on ASD current harmonics.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

are added together on the primary, the resulting waveform injected
onto the utility system has much lower distortion, primarily because
the fifth and seventh harmonics are cancelled out. These two harmon-
ics are responsible for most of the distortion for six-pulse drives.
6.5.2
Zigzag transformers
Zigzag transformers are often applied in commercial facilities to con-
trol zero-sequence harmonic components. A zigzag transformer acts
like a filter to the zero-sequence current by offering a low-impedance
path to neutral. This reduces the amount of current that flows in the
neutral back toward the supply by providing a shorter path for the cur-
rent. To be effective, the transformer must be located near the load on
the circuit that is being protected.
The two most important problems in commercial facilities are over-
loaded neutral conductors and transformer heating. Both of these prob-
lems can be solved with proper zigzag transformer placement. Some
new commercial buildings include zigzag transformers on the 480/208-
V supply transformer secondaries to prevent transformer overheating.
A zigzag transformer located at the supply transformer secondary does
not provide any benefit for neutral conductors supplying the loads.
Typical results with a zigzag transformer show that it can shunt
about 50 percent of the third-harmonic current away from the main cir-
cuit neutral conductors. Thus, the zigzag transformer can almost
Applied Harmonics
251
ASD
ASD
480-Volt Bus
Figure 6.11
A 12-pulse configuration as a method to control harmonics from two ASDs.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

always reduce neutral currents due to zero-sequence harmonics to
acceptable levels. The largest zero-sequence harmonic will nearly
always be the third harmonic in office buildings with many computers
and related equipment.
Zigzag transformers are an excellent choice for existing facilities
where neutral conductor problems and possible transformer heating
are concerns, assuming that there is a convenient place to install the
transformer between the neutral circuit of concern and the actual
loads. In new facilities, it may be better to simply design the circuits
with sufficient current-carrying capacity in the neutrals and with
higher-capacity transformers.
6.5.3
Passive filters
Passive filters are inductance, capacitance, and resistance elements
configured and tuned to control harmonics. They are commonly used
and are relatively inexpensive compared with other means for elimi-
nating harmonic distortion. However, they have the disadvantage of
potentially interacting adversely with the power system, and it is
important to check all possible system interactions when they are
designed. They are employed either to shunt the harmonic currents off
the line or to block their flow between parts of the system by tuning the
elements to create a resonance at a selected frequency. Figure 6.12
shows several types of common filter arrangements.
Shunt passive filters.
The most common type of passive filter is the sin-
gle-tuned “notch” filter. This is the most economical type and is fre-
quently sufficient for the application. The notch filter is series-tuned to
present a low impedance to a particular harmonic current and is con-
nected in shunt with the power system. Thus, harmonic currents are
diverted from their normal flow path on the line through the filter.
252
Chapter Six
SINGLE-TUNED
1ST-ORDER
HIGH-PASS
2ND-ORDER
HIGH-PASS
3RD-ORDER
HIGH-PASS
Figure 6.12
Common passive filter configurations.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Notch filters can provide power factor correction in addition to har-
monic suppression. In fact, power factor correction capacitors may be
used to make notch filters.
Figure 6.13 shows one example of such a filter designed for medium-
voltage applications. The dry-type iron-core reactor is positioned atop
the capacitors, which are connected in a wye, or star, configuration
with the other phases (not shown). Each capacitor can is fused with a
current-limiting fuse to minimize damage in case of a can failure. In
outdoor installations it is often more economical to use air-core reac-
tors. Iron-core reactors may also be oil-insulated.
Applied Harmonics
253
Figure 6.13
One phase of a three-phase metal-enclosed filter. (Courtesy
of Northeast Power Systems, Inc.)
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Figure 6.14 shows another design for industrial site applications.
Here the reactors are placed on top of the cabinet housing the capaci-
tors and switchgear.
An example of a common 480-V filter arrangement is illustrated in
Fig. 6.15. The figure shows a delta-connected low-voltage capacitor
bank converted into a filter by adding an inductance in series with the
phases. In this case, the notch harmonic hnotch is related to the funda-
mental frequency reactances by
hnotch  
(6.6)
Note that XC in this case is the reactance of one leg of the delta rather
than the equivalent line-to-neutral capacitive reactance. If phase-to-
phase voltage and three-phase kvar are used to compute XC, as previ-
ously described, the factor 3 would be omitted.
One important side effect of this type of filter is that it creates a
sharp parallel resonance point at a frequency below the notch fre-
XC

3XF
254
Chapter Six
Figure 6.14
Filter for industrial power system applications.
(Courtesy of Gilbert Electrical Systems.)
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

quency (Fig. 6.15c). This resonant frequency must be safely away from
any significant harmonic or other frequency component that may be
produced by the load. Filters are commonly tuned slightly lower than
the harmonic to be filtered to provide a margin of safety in case there
is some change in system parameters that would raise the notch fre-
quency. If they were tuned exactly to the harmonic, changes in either
capacitance or inductance with temperature or failure might shift the
parallel resonance higher into the harmonic being filtered. This could
present a situation worse than one without a filter because the reso-
nance is generally very sharp.
To avoid problems with this resonance, filters are added to the sys-
tem starting with the lowest significant harmonic found in the system.
For example, installing a seventh-harmonic filter usually requires that
a fifth-harmonic filter also be installed. The new parallel resonance
with a seventh-harmonic filter alone is often very near the fifth, which
is generally disastrous.
The filter configuration of Fig. 6.15a does not admit zero-sequence
currents because the capacitor is delta-connected, which makes it inef-
fective for filtering zero-sequence triplen harmonics. Because 480-V
Applied Harmonics
255
(a) Typical low-voltage
     filter configuration
(c) System
frequency
response
(Z1 = 1.0)
(b) Equivalent circuit of
      system with filter
A
B
C
XC
Xf
XSC
Xf
XC
3
Harmonic
source
Capacitor
only
Capacitor
converted
to
filter
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
hnotch
Harmonic number h
Zh
0
10
20
30
40
50
Figure 6.15
Creating a fifth-harmonic notch filter and its effect on system response.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

capacitors are usually delta-configured, other solutions must be
employed when it becomes necessary to control zero-sequence third-
harmonic currents in many industrial and commercial building facili-
ties. In contrast, capacitors on utility distribution systems are more
commonly wye-connected. This gives the option of controlling the zero-
sequence triplen harmonics simply by changing the neutral connection.
Placing a reactor in the neutral of a capacitor is a common way to
force the bank to filter only zero-sequence harmonics. This technique is
often employed to eliminate telephone interference. A tapped reactor is
installed in the neutral and the tap adjusted to minimize the telephone.
Passive filters should always be placed on a bus where the short-cir-
cuit reactance XSC can be expected to remain constant. While the notch
frequency will remain fixed, the parallel resonance will move with sys-
tem impedance. For example, the parallel resonant frequency for run-
ning with standby generation by itself is likely to be much lower than
when interconnected with the utility because the generator impedance
is much higher than the utility impedance. This could magnify a har-
monic that is normally insignificant. Thus, filters are often removed for
operation with standby generation.
Also, filters must be designed with the capacity of the bus in mind.
The temptation is to size the current-carrying capability based solely
on the load that is producing the harmonic. However, a small amount
of background voltage distortion on a very strong bus may impose
excessive duty on the filter.
Series passive filters.
Unlike a notch filter which is connected in shunt
with the power system, a series passive filter is connected in series
with the load. The inductance and capacitance are connected in paral-
lel and are tuned to provide a high impedance at a selected harmonic
frequency. The high impedance then blocks the flow of harmonic cur-
rents at the tuned frequency only. At fundamental frequency, the filter
would be designed to yield a low impedance, thereby allowing the fun-
damental current to follow with only minor additional impedance and
losses. Figure 6.16 shows a typical series filter arrangement.
Series filters are used to block a single harmonic current (such as the
third harmonic) and are especially useful in a single-phase circuit
where it is not possible to take advantage of zero-sequence character-
istics. The use of the series filters is limited in blocking multiple har-
monic currents. Each harmonic current requires a series filter tuned to
that harmonic. This arrangement can create significant losses at the
fundamental frequency.
Furthermore, like other series components in power systems, a
series filter must be designed to carry a full rated load current and
must have an overcurrent protection scheme. Thus, series filters are
much less commonly applied than shunt filters.
256
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Low-pass broadband filters.
Multiple stages of both series and shunt fil-
ters are often required in practical applications. For example, in shunt
filter applications, a filter for blocking a seventh-harmonic frequency
would typically require two stages of shunt filters, the seventh-harmonic
filter itself and the lower fifth-harmonic filter. Similarly, in series filter
applications, each frequency requires a series filter of its own; thus, mul-
tiple stages of filters are needed to block multiple frequencies.
In numerous power system conditions, harmonics can appear not
only in a single frequency but can spread over a wide range of frequen-
cies. A six-pulse converter generates characteristic harmonics of 5th,
7th, 11th, 13th, etc. Electronic power converters can essentially gener-
ate time-varying interharmonics covering a wide range of frequencies.
Designing a shunt or series filter to eliminate or reduce these wide-
spread and time-varying harmonics would be very difficult using shunt
filters. Therefore, an alternative harmonic filter must be devised.
A low-pass broadband filter is an ideal application to block multiple
or widespread harmonic frequencies. Current with frequency compo-
nents below the filter cutoff frequency can pass; however, current with
frequency components above the cutoff frequency is filtered out. Since
this type of low-pass filter is typically designed to achieve a low cutoff
frequency, it is then called a low-pass broadband filter. A typical con-
figuration of a low-pass broadband filter is shown in Fig. 6.17.
In distribution system applications, the effect of low-pass broadband
filters can be obtained by installing a capacitor bank on the low-voltage
side of a transformer as shown in Fig. 6.18a. The size of the capacitor
bank would have to be so selected to provide the desired cutoff fre-
quency when combined with the transformer leakage inductance and
the system impedance. It is then capable of preventing harmonics
above the cutoff frequency from penetrating the high-voltage side of the
transformer. Since the cutoff frequency can be sometimes quite low, the
size of the capacitor bank may be fairly large. This will result in a sig-
nificant voltage rise. Should the voltage remain high, a voltage regula-
tor or transformer load tap changer (LTC) must be used to lower the
voltage to an acceptable level.
In a substation serving multiple feeders, a line reactor and voltage
regulator can be installed at the beginning of the feeder to isolate the
portion of the system subject to high voltage. This arrangement will
Applied Harmonics
257
Figure 6.16
A series passive filter.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

allow voltage levels at other feeders to be maintained at normal values.
The combination of the transformer leakage inductance, the line reac-
tor, the voltage regulator, and the capacitor bank yields the desired cut-
off frequency. Figure 6.18b depicts this arrangement.
In industrial system applications, commercial low-pass broadband fil-
ters have been used to prevent harmonics produced by nonlinear loads
from entering the ac system. The typical design is illustrated in Fig.
6.19.10 Figure 6.20 shows a typical system intended for this application.
A line reactor installed in series with the main ac line is used to provide
an electrical separation between the ac system and the nonlinear load. A
capacitor bank is installed in shunt to form a low-pass broadband filter
258
Chapter Six
Figure 6.17
A low-pass broad-
band filter configuration.
Figure 6.18
A low-pass broadband filter application in power service for industrial
systems. Filter arrangement in a substation with (a) dedicated and (b) multiple
feeders.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

configuration. Since the presence of the capacitor bank increases the
voltage at the input of the ASD, a buck transformer is needed to bring
the voltage at the line reactor output down to a level where the voltage
at the capacitor is acceptable. The optimum performance of a low-pass
broadband filter in ASD applications is obtained when there is no series
inductor between the filter capacitor banks and the ASD dc bus capaci-
tor. Any impedance in between reduces the charging capability of the dc
bus capacitor since it is charged from the filter capacitor.
The cutoff frequency for a low-pass broadband filter for ASD appli-
cations is typically designed at a low harmonic frequency, such as at
Applied Harmonics
259
Figure 6.19
A low-pass broadband filter application in an industrial system.
Figure 6.20
A commercial 600-V, three-phase broadband filter. (Courtesy of
MTE Corp.)
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

100 to 200 Hz on a 60-Hz system. With this low tuning frequency, the
filter is unlikely to excite any undesired resonance with the rest of the
system and can filter out much of the harmonic currents. In ASD
applications the filter can generally reduce the overall current har-
monic distortion from the 90 to 100 percent range down to the 9 to 12
percent range under rated load conditions. This performance is cer-
tainly much better than a simple ac line choke, which only reduces
the overall current distortion down to the 30 to 40 percent range.
However, the cost of an ac line choke is less than a low-pass broad-
band filter.
C filters.
C filters are an alternative to low-pass broadband filters 
in reducing multiple harmonic frequencies simultaneously in indus-
trial and utility systems. They can attenuate a wide range of steady-
state and time-varying harmonic and interharmonic frequencies
generated by electronic converters, induction furnaces, cycloconvert-
ers, and the like.
The configuration of a C filter is nearly identical to that of the sec-
ond-order high-pass filter shown earlier in Fig. 6.12. The main distinc-
tion between the two configurations is that the C filter possesses an
auxiliary capacitor Ca in series with the inductor Lm. A typical configu-
ration of a C filter is shown in Fig. 6.21. The auxiliary capacitor Ca is
sized in such a way that its capacitive reactance cancels out Lm at the
fundamental frequency, bypassing the damping resistance R. For this
reason, the losses associated with R are practically eliminated, allow-
ing a C filter to be tuned to a low frequency.
The impedance frequency response of a C filter is also essentially
identical to that of a second-order high-pass filter. At high-order har-
monic frequencies, the reactance of Ca is small, while that of Lm is large.
Therefore, the impedance of the series Lm and Ca branch is dominated
by the reactance of Lm. The high-frequency responses of the C filter and
second-order high-pass filters are similar (see Fig. 6.21).
In designing a C filter,11 it is necessary to specify ISF(hT), the maxi-
mum harmonic current allowed to flow into the system at hT, the tuned
harmonic frequency. It is also assumed that the requirement for the
reactive power compensation is known, thus establishing the nominal
size of capacitor Cm. Figure 6.22 shows an equivalent circuit for deriv-
ing filter components R, Ca, and Lm. The short-circuit reactance is
denoted as XS. Filter components can be computed as follows:
R 
RF (hT)2 

X
h
C
T
m

2

RF (hT)
260
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

XLm  XCa 
where RF 
XS  short-circuit reactance at fundamental frequency
XLm  reactance of Lm at fundamental frequency
XCa  reactance of Ca at fundamental frequency
Example. Let us consider a C filter applied at a 13.8-kV bus. The fil-
ter is designed to deliver 5 Mvar at the fundamental frequency (XCm 
13.82/5  38.1 ) and to attenuate 70 percent of injected harmonics at
the tuned harmonic hT of 5.5.
hTXS


ISF (
1
h
T)2
 
1
RF (hT)2 

X
h
C
T
m

2


X
h
C
T
m

hT
h

T
1

Applied Harmonics
261
C filter
2nd-order high-pass filter
Lm
Ca
Cm
R
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
2
4
6
8
10
Harmonic number h
12
14
16
18
20
Voltage Vh or impedance Zh
Figure 6.21
A typical C-filter configuration and its impedance frequency response
(solid line).
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Thus, the maximum current allowed to flow in the system at the
tuned frequency would be ISF (hT  5.5)  0.3 pu (30 percent). The
short-circuit reactance of the system is assumed to be 1.0 . From the
given equations, it can be computed that R  29.5  and XCa  XLa 
1.383 . Figure 6.23 shows the harmonic current allowed to flow in the
system, i.e., ISF as a function of frequency for C filters with ISF (hT  5.5)
of 10, 30, and 50 percent.
From Fig. 6.23, it is observed that at lower harmonic frequencies the
ISF (hT) is smaller, and the damping of the filter would be less. For
example, a C filter with ISF (hT  5.5)  0.1 has less damping compared
to one with ISF (hT  5.5)  0.3 or 0.5 because the resistive component
R has a larger value.
At higher harmonic frequencies, the amount of current flowing in the
system is approximately identical in all cases shown in Fig. 6.23 since
the Cm reactance dominates the overall filter impedance. For this rea-
son, higher attenuation at high harmonic frequencies cannot be
achieved by having a C filter with lower ISF (hT). Instead, an additional
filter would be required.
Figure 6.24 shows the configuration of a C filter coupled with a notch
filter to achieve more attenuation at higher frequencies. The drawback
with this arrangement is that there is a new parallel resonance associ-
ated with the notch filter. This parallel resonance must be so selected
that it is not excited by any harmonic currents present in the system.
The notch filter is typically tuned higher than a C filter. If the notch
filter is tuned below the C filter, the size of the auxiliary capacitor Ca
would be significantly larger, making the C filter impractical.
6.5.4
Active filters
Active filters are relatively new types of devices for eliminating har-
monics. They are based on sophisticated power electronics and are
much more expensive than passive filters. However, they have the dis-
tinct advantage that they do not resonate with the system. Active fil-
262
Chapter Six
Lm
Xs
Ca
Cm
R
ISF
Iharmonics
Figure 6.22
Equivalent circuit for deriving C-filter
specifications.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Applied Harmonics
263
Isp (5.5) = 0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
Harmonic number h
12
14
16
18
20
Harmonic current allowed to flow in Xs
Isp (5.5) = 0.1
Isp (5.5) = 0.3
Isp (5.5) = 0.5
Isp (5.5) = 0.5
Isp (5.5) = 0.3
Figure 6.23
An example of a C filter where the maximum harmonic current allowed
to flow in the system is 10, 30, and 50 percent at the tuned harmonic order of 5.5.
Lm
Ca
Cm
R
C filter with a 3.0-Mvar notch filter
Lnotch
Cnotch
C filter
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Harmonic number h
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Harmonic current allowed to flow in Xs
Figure 6.24
A C filter with and without a notch filter.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ters can work independently of the system impedance characteristics.
Thus, they can be used in very difficult circumstances where passive
filters cannot operate successfully because of parallel resonance prob-
lems. They can also address more than one harmonic at a time and
combat other power quality problems such as flicker. They are particu-
larly useful for large, distorting loads fed from relatively weak points
on the power system.
The basic idea is to replace the portion of the sine wave that is miss-
ing in the current in a nonlinear load. Figure 6.25 illustrates the con-
cept. An electronic control monitors the line voltage and/or current,
switching the power electronics very precisely to track the load current
or voltage and force it to be sinusoidal. As shown, there are two funda-
mental approaches: one that uses an inductor to store current to be
injected into the system at the appropriate instant and one that uses a
capacitor. Therefore, while the load current is distorted to the extent
demanded by the nonlinear load, the current seen by the system is
much more sinusoidal.
Active filters can typically be programmed to correct for the power
factor as well as harmonics.
6.6
Harmonic Filter Design: A Case Study
This section illustrates a procedure for designing harmonic filters for
industrial applications. This procedure can also be used to convert an
existing power factor correction capacitor into a harmonic filter. As
described in Sec. 4.1.2, power factor correction capacitors are used
widely in industrial facilities to lower losses and utility bills by improv-
ing power factor. On the other hand, power factor correction capacitors
may produce harmonic resonance and magnify utility capacitor-switch-
ing transients. Therefore, it is often desirable to implement one or more
capacitor banks in a facility as a harmonic filter.
264
Chapter Six
OR
NONLINEAR
LOAD
Figure 6.25
Application of an active filter at a load.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Filter design procedures are detailed in the steps shown below. The
best way to illustrate the design procedures is through an example.
A single-tuned notch filter will be designed for an industrial facility
and applied at a 480-V bus. The load where the filter will be installed
is approximately 1200 kVA with a relatively poor displacement power
factor of 0.75 lagging. The total harmonic current produced by this load
is approximately 30 percent of the fundamental current, with a maxi-
mum of 25 percent fifth harmonic. The facility is supplied by a 1500-
kVA transformer with 6.0 percent of impedance. The fifth-harmonic
background voltage distortion on the utility side of the transformer is
1.0 percent of the fundamental when there is no load. Figure 6.7 shown
earlier depicts the industrial facility where the filter will be applied.
The harmonic design procedures are provided in the following steps.
1. Select a tuned frequency for the filter.
The tuned frequency is selected
based on the harmonic characteristics of the loads involved. Because of
the nature of a single-tuned filter, the filtering should start at the low-
est harmonic frequency generated by the load. In this case, that will be
the fifth harmonic. The filter will be tuned slightly below the harmonic
frequency of concern to allow for tolerances in the filter components
and variations in system impedance. This prevents the filter from act-
ing as a direct short circuit for the offending harmonic current, reduc-
ing duty on the filter components. It also minimizes the possibility of
dangerous harmonic resonance should the system parameters change
and cause the tuning frequency to shift.
In this example, the filter is designed to be tuned to the 4.7th. This
is a common choice of notch frequency since the resulting parallel res-
onant frequency will be located around the fourth harmonic, a har-
monic frequency that is not produced by most nonlinear loads. The
notch filter is illustrated in Fig. 6.26.
2. Compute capacitor bank size and the resonant frequency.
As a general
rule, the filter size is based on the load reactive power requirement for
power factor correction. When an existing power factor correction
capacitor is converted to a harmonic filter, the capacitor size is given.
The reactor size is then selected to tune the capacitor to the desired fre-
quency. However, depending on the tuned frequency, the voltage rating
of the capacitor bank may have to be higher than the system voltage to
allow for the voltage rise across the reactor. Therefore, one may have 
to change out the capacitor anyway.
This example assumes that no capacitor is installed and that the
desired power factor is 96 percent. Thus, the net reactive power from
the filter required to correct from 75 to 96 percent power factor can be
computed as follows:
Applied Harmonics
265
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Reactive power demand for a 75 percent power factor would be
1200  sin [arccos (0.75) ]  794.73 kvar
■Reactive power demand for a 96 percent power factor would be
1200  sin [arccos (0.96) ]  336.0 kvar
■Required compensation from the filter:
794.73  336.0  457.73 kvar
For a nominal 480-V system, the net wye-equivalent filter reactance
(capacitive) XFilt is determined by
XFilt 

 0.5034 
XFilt is the difference between the capacitive reactance and the induc-
tive reactance at fundamental frequency:
XFilt  XCap  XL
For tuning at the 4.7th harmonic,
XCap  h2XL  4.72XL
0.482 (1000)

457.73
kV2 (1000)

kvar
266
Chapter Six
Filter
Reactor
Power Factor
Correction Capacitor
480-Volt Bus
Figure 6.26
Example low-voltage filter configuration.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Thus, the desired capacitive reactance can be determined by
XCap 

 0.5272 
At this point, it is not known whether the filter capacitor can be rated
at 480 V, the same as the system, or will have to be rated one step
higher at 600 V. To achieve this reactance at a 480-V rating, the capac-
itor would have to be rated
kvar 

 437 kvar
Similarly, at 600 V, the capacitor would have to be rated 682 kvar. For
now, the filter will be designed using a 480-V capacitor rated 450 kvar,
which is a commonly available size near the desired value. For this
capacitor rating,
XCap  0.5120 
3. Compute filter reactor size.
The filter reactor size can now be selected
to tune the capacitor to the desired frequency. From step 1, the desired
frequency is at the 4.7th harmonic or 282 Hz. The filter reactor size is
computed from the wye-equivalent capacitive reactance, determined in
step 2, as follows:
XL (fund) 

 0.02318 
or
L 
 0.06148 mH
Alternatively, the reactor size can be computed by solving for L in the
following equation:
fh 
where fh  4.7  60  282 Hz.
The next step is to evaluate the duty requirements for the capacitor
and reactor.
1

2	 LC (wy
e)
XL (fund)

2	  60
0.5120

4.72
XCap (wye)

h2
0.482 (1000)

0.5272
kV2 (1000)

XCap
0.5034 (4.72)

4.72  1
XFilth2

h2  1
Applied Harmonics
267
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

4. Evaluate filter duty requirements.
Evaluation of filter duty require-
ments typically involves capacitor bank duties. These duties include
peak voltage, current, kvar produced, and rms voltage. IEEE Standard
18-1992, IEEE Standard for Shunt Power Capacitors, is used as the
limiting standard to evaluate these duties. Computations of the duties
are fairly lengthy; therefore, they are divided into three steps, i.e., com-
putation for fundamental duties, harmonic duties, and rms current and
peak voltage duties.
5. Computation of fundamental duty requirements.
In this step, a funda-
mental frequency operating voltage across the capacitor bank is deter-
mined. The computation is as follows:
a. The apparent reactance of the combined capacitor and reactor at
the fundamental frequency is
Xfund  |XL  XCap (wye)|  |0.02318  0.5120|  0.489 
b. The fundamental frequency filter current is
Ifund 

 567 A
c. The fundamental frequency operating voltage across the capacitor
bank is
VLL,Cap (fund)  3  Ifund  XCap (wye)  502.8 V
This is the nominal fundamental voltage across the capacitor. It should
be adjusted for any contingency conditions (maximum system voltage),
and it should be less than 110 percent of the capacitor rated voltage.
d. Because of the fact that the filter draws more fundamental cur-
rent than the capacitor alone, the actual reactive power produced is
larger than the capacitor rating:
kvarfund  3  Ifund  kVactual  471 kvar
6. Computation of harmonic duty requirements.
In this step, the maxi-
mum harmonic current expected in the filter is computed. This current
has two components: the harmonic current produced by the nonlinear
load (computed in step a) and the harmonic current from the utility
side (computed in step b).
480/3

0.489
kVactual/3

Xfund
268
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

a. Since the nonlinear load produces 25 percent fifth harmonic of the
fundamental current, the harmonic current in amperes produced by
the load would be
Ih (amps)  Ih (pu)
 0.25
 360.8 A
b. Harmonic current contributed to the filter from the source side is
estimated as follows. It will be assumed that the 1 percent fifth-har-
monic voltage distortion present on the utility system will be limited
only by the impedances of the service transformer and the filter; the
utility impedance will be neglected.
■Fundamental frequency impedance of the service transformer:
XT (fund)  ZT (%)
 0.06
 0.0092 
■The fifth-harmonic impedance of the service transformer (the trans-
former is inductive):
XT (harm)  hXT (fund)  5  0.0092  0.0461 
■The harmonic impedance of the capacitor bank is
XCap (wye), harm 

 0.1024 
■The harmonic impedance of the reactor is
XL (harm)  hXL (fund)  5  0.02318  0.1159 
■Given that the voltage distortion on the utility system is 0.01 pu, the
estimated amount of fifth-harmonic current contributed to the filter
from the source side would be
Ih (utility) 

 46.5 A
0.01  480

3 0.0461  0.1024 
 0.1159
Vh (utility) (pu)  kVactual

3 XT (harm)  XCap (wye),harm 
 XL (harm)
0.512

5
XCap (wye)

h
0.482

1.5
kV2
actual

MVAXfmr
1200

3  0.48
kVA

3  kVactual
Applied Harmonics
269
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

c. The maximum harmonic current is the sum of the harmonic cur-
rent produced by the load and that contributed from the utility side:
Ih (total)  360.8 
 46.5  407 A
d. The harmonic voltage across the capacitor can be computed as fol-
lows:
VCap (L-L,rms-harm)  3 Ih (total)
 3  407 
 72.2 V
7. Evaluate total rms current and peak voltage requirements.
These two
quantities are computed as follows:
a. Total rms current passing through the filter:
Irms,total  I2
fund 
 Ih
2
(utili
ty)
  5672 
 4072
  698 A
This is the total rms current rating required for the filter reactor.
b. Assuming the harmonic and fundamental components add
together, the maximum peak voltage across the capacitor is
VL-L,Cap (max,Peak)  VL-L,Cap (fund) 
 VCap (L-L,rms-harm)
 502.8 
 72.2  575 V
c. The rms voltage across the capacitor is
VL-L,Cap (rms,total)  V2L-L,C
ap (fund)
 
 V2
Cap (L-L,
rms-harm
)
 502.8
2 
 72
.22
  508 V
d. The total kvar seen by the capacitor is
kvarCap (wye),total  3 Irms,total  kVL-L,Cap (rms,total)
 3  698  0.508  614 kvar
8. Evaluate capacitor rating limits.
The duties (peak voltage, rms volt-
age and current, and kvar produced) for the proposed filter capacitor
are compared to the various IEEE standard limits in Table 6.4. This
would be a very marginal application because the capacitor duties are
0.512

5
XCap (wye) 

h
270
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

essentially at the maximum limits. There is no tolerance for any devi-
ation in assumptions or increases in service voltage. A 480-V capacitor
will likely have a short life in this application.
When this happens, a capacitor rated for higher voltage must be
used. At 600 V, the equivalent capacitor rating would be
450 
 703 kvar
A nominal rating of 700 kvar with the reactor values computed in step
3 would provide essentially the same filter within normal manufactur-
ing tolerances. The 600-V capacitor would be well within its rating in
this application.
9. Evaluate filter frequency response.
The filter frequency response is
now evaluated to make sure that the filter does not create a new reso-
nance at a frequency that could cause additional problems. The har-
monic at which the parallel resonance below the notch frequency will
occur is computed as follows:
h0    3.97
This assumes the service transformer reactance dominates the source
impedance. Including the utility system impedance will lower the fre-
quency.
This filter results in a resonance very near the fourth harmonic,
which is an interesting case. Normally, there are very few significant
sources of an even harmonic during steady-state operation and this fil-
ter would work acceptably. However, there are significant fourth-har-
0.512

0.0092 
 0.02318
XCap (wye)

XT (fund) 
 XL (fund)
6002

4802
Applied Harmonics
271
TABLE 6.4
Comparison Table for Evaluating Filter Duty Limit
Duty
Definition
Limit, %
Actual values
Actual values, %
Peak voltage
120
119
RMS voltage
110
106
RMS current
180
129
kvar
135
136
614 kvar

450 kvar
kvarCap(wye),total

kvarrated
698 A

541 A
Irms,total

ICap(rated)
508 V

480 V
VL-L,Cap(rms,total)

kVrated
575 V

480 V
VL-L,Cap(max,Peak)

kVrated
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

monic currents during events such as transformer energization. If the
filter is in service when a large transformer is energized and there is
very little load to dampen the resonance, there can be overvoltages that
persist well past the usual inrush transient period. In this case, the
designer should first include the utility system impedance in the cal-
culation. To gain additional margin from the fourth, the basic filter size
would have to be increased.
10. Evaluate the effect of filter parameter variations within specified toler-
ance.
Filter designers generally assume capacitors are designed with a
tolerance of 
15 percent of the nominal capacitance value. Reactors are
assumed to have a tolerance of ±5 percent of the nominal inductance.
These tolerances can significantly affect the filter performance should
the frequency response over this range create a harmful resonance.
Therefore, the final step is to check the filter design for the various
extremes. This is automatically done in some filter design software.
Steps 1 through 10 illustrate a typical single-tuned filter design.
Multiple single-tuned filters might be necessary when a single-tuned
filter does not control harmonics to acceptable levels. For example, 5th,
7th-, and 11th-harmonic filters may be needed for some large six-pulse
loads. The general procedure is the same except that the reactive power
requirement is first divided between the filter stages. Evaluating the
effect of component tolerance is particularly important since there are
multiple filters involved.
The tuning characteristic of the filter is described by its quality fac-
tor Q. Q is a measure of the sharpness of tuning and, for series filter
resistance, is defined as
Q 
where R  series resistance of filter elements
n  tuning harmonic
XL  reactance of filter reactor at fundamental frequency
Typically, the value of R consists of only the resistance of the inductor.
This usually results in a very large value of Q and a very sharp filter-
ing action. This is normally satisfactory for the typical single-filter
application and results in a filter that is very economical to operate
(small energy consumption). However, sometimes it is desirable to
introduce some intentional losses to help dampen the response of the
system. A resistor is commonly added in parallel with the reactor to cre-
ate a high-pass filter. In this case, Q is defined as the inverse of the
above series case so that large numbers reflect sharp tuning. High-pass
nXL

R
272
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

filters are generally used only at the 11th and 13th harmonics, and
higher. It is usually not economical to operate such a filter at the 5th
and 7th harmonics because of the amount of losses and the size of the
resistor (a C filter might be applicable).
The reactors used for larger filter applications are generally built
with an air core, which provides linear characteristics with respect to
frequency and current. Reactors for smaller filters and filters that
must fit into a confined space or near steel structures are built with a
steel core. As stated in step 10, 5 percent tolerance in the reactance is
usually acceptable for industrial applications. The 60-Hz X/R ratio is
usually between 50 and 150. A series resistor may be used to lower this
ratio, if desired, to produce a filter with more damping. The reactor
should be rated to withstand a short circuit at the junction of the reac-
tor and capacitor. A design Q for the high-pass configuration might typ-
ically be 1 or 2 to achieve a flat response above the tuned frequency.
Filters for many high-power, three-phase applications such as static
var systems often include fifth and seventh harmonics because those
are the largest harmonics produced by the six-pulse bridge.
Occasionally this will cause a system resonance near the third that
may require a third-harmonic filter. Normally, one wouldn’t think that
the third harmonic would be a problem in a three-phase bridge, but
imbalances in the operation of the bridge and in system parameters
will create small amounts of uncharacteristic harmonics. Analysts
commonly assume the uncharacteristic harmonics are attenuated 90 to
95 percent of the theoretical maximum. If the system responds to those
harmonics, filters may have to be applied despite the assumption that
these harmonics would be cancelled. In three-phase loads that can
operate while single-phased (e.g., arc furnaces), no attenuation of the
uncharacteristic harmonics can be assumed.
6.7
Case Studies
Two additional case studies are presented which describe (1) the eval-
uation of neutral conductor loading and transformer derating and (2)
interharmonics caused by induction furnaces.
6.7.1
Evaluation of neutral loading and
transformer derating
Loads in a data center facility are dominated by hundreds of single-
phase computer servers and networking equipment. The phase cur-
rents in the low-voltage circuits have the harmonic characteristics
shown in Fig. 6.27. Since these loads are rich in the third harmonic,
there is a good likelihood the neutral conductor may be overloaded.
Applied Harmonics
273
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The problem is to estimate the neutral conductor loading in amperes
and in percent of the rms phase current. In addition, the amount that
the transformer supplying this load must be derated is to be deter-
mined assuming the eddy-current loss factor under rated load PEC-R is
8 percent.
The system is assumed to be balanced. Therefore, the sum of all
phase currents results in mostly third-harmonic current in the neutral
conductor. The rms phase current is
Irms  

N 

31
h  1,3,5,N
I

h
2

 1.26 I1  359.1 A
The third-harmonic current is 65.7 percent, giving a neutral ccurrent of
Ineutral  3I3rd  3  0.657I1  562.72 A
 1.56Irms
Based on this estimate, the neutral conductor will be loaded to approx-
imately 156 percent of the phase conductor. This phenomenon has been
responsible for neutral overloading. Common solutions are to use a
274
Chapter Six
0
10
20
30
40
Time (ms)
50
60
70
80
–1000
–500
0
500
1000
Current (A)
Harm
Fund
3rd
5th
7th
9th
11th
13th
15th
%
100.0
65.7
37.7
12.7
4.4
5.3
2.5
1.9
Phase
–37
–97
–166
113
–46
–158
92
–51
Harm
17th
19th
21st
23rd
25th
27th
29th
31st
%
1.8
1.1
0.6
0.8
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.2
Phase
–151
84
–41
–148
64
–25
–122
102
Figure 6.27
Phase current and its harmonic characteristics. Fundamental amps:
285.5 A. Phase angles are in degrees.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Separate neutral conductor for each phase
■Double neutral conductor size
■Zigzag transformer close to the loads to shorten the return path for
the third-harmonic currents and relieve the overloaded neutral
■Series filter tuned to the third harmonic in the neutral circuit at the
transformer
The transformer derating can be estimated by first computing the K
factor12 by using Eq. (5.30) presented in Sec. 5.10.2. Table 6.5 shows
this computation and yields K  6.34. From IEEE Standard 57.110-
1998, Recommended Practice for Establishing Transformer Capability
When Supplying Nonsinusoidal Load Currents, the standard derating
for this waveform is 0.85 pu for PEC-R  8 percent.
6.7.2
Interharmonics caused by induction
furnaces
The key symptom of this problem was that residential customers in a
widespread area complained about their clocks running faster at about
the same time each weekday. Other timekeeping instruments also
behaved erratically.
Applied Harmonics
275
TABLE 6.5
Computation for Transformer Derating
Harmonic
Current, %
Frequency, Hz
Current, pu
I2
I2h2
1
100.00
60
1.000
1.000
1.000
3
65.70
180
0.657
0.432
3.885
5
37.70
300
0.377
0.142
3.553
7
12.70
420
0.127
0.016
0.790
9
4.40
540
0.044
0.002
0.157
11
5.30
660
0.053
0.003
0.340
13
2.50
780
0.025
0.001
0.106
15
1.90
900
0.019
0.000
0.081
17
1.80
1020
0.018
0.000
0.094
19
1.10
1140
0.011
0.000
0.044
21
0.60
1260
0.006
0.000
0.016
23
0.80
1380
0.008
0.000
0.034
25
0.40
1500
0.004
0.000
0.010
27
0.20
1620
0.002
0.000
0.003
29
0.20
1740
0.002
0.000
0.003
31
0.20
1860
0.002
0.000
0.004
Total
1.596
10.119
K factor
6.34
Standard derating (ANSI/IEEE C57.110-1986)
0.85 pu
Assumed eddy current loss factor PEC-R
8%
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The clocks that experienced the problem count time by detecting zero
crossings in the voltage waveform. The time between two adjacent zero
crossings is a half cycle of the power system fundamental frequency.
Since the frequency error of the power system is negligible over long
time periods, these clocks are very accurate.
Fast-clock phenomena occur when there are more zero crossings
than expected within a half cycle due to high-frequency distortion in
the voltage waveform. The high-frequency signal appears as a saw-
tooth or sinusoid superimposed on the fundamental frequency signal.
Figure 6.28 shows a typical voltage waveform measured on customer
premises. It is clear that there will be instances where there are mul-
tiple zero crossings within a half cycle.
Figure 6.28b shows that the high-frequency distortion occurs at the
29th (1740 Hz) and the 35th (2100 Hz) harmonics. Further investiga-
tion revealed that these frequencies were produced by induction fur-
naces located at a steel-grinding facility. The distortion affected
residential customers several miles away. Both the grinding facility
and residential customers were supplied from the same 46-kV distrib-
ution system, shown in the one-line diagram of the facility in Fig. 6.29.
276
Chapter Six
Figure 6.28
Voltage waveform causing fast-clock problems due to high-frequency dis-
tortion and its harmonic spectrum.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The operating frequency of the two induction furnaces varies
between 800 to 1000 Hz depending on the amount and type of material
being melted. The harmonic characteristics of these furnaces were
described in Sec. 5.11. Assuming the operating frequency at a particu-
lar operation stage is 950 Hz, the resulting line current computed using
Eq. (5.34) would contain the following pairs of currents: (1840 Hz, 1960
Hz), (3740 Hz, 3860 Hz), etc. These currents are interharmonic cur-
rents since they are not integer multiples of the fundamental fre-
quency. The first pair are the strongest interharmonic components and
are more prominent in the voltage. Since the furnace operating fre-
quency varies between 800 and 1000 Hz, the first pair of the resulting
interharmonic current varies between 1540 (25.67th harmonic) and
2060 Hz (or 34.33th harmonic). This varying harmonic distortion
makes the application of passive shunt filters impossible.
The PCC for this facility was at the high-voltage side of the 46/12.47-
kV transformer. Figure 6.30 shows the voltage waveform at the PCC
where the high-frequency distortion is clearly visible on top of the fun-
damental frequency waveform.
To understand why the distortion appeared throughout the 46-kV
system, a frequency scan of the system looking from the PCC was per-
Applied Harmonics
277
2000 A
3000 A
12.47 kV/720 V
46 kV/12.47 kV
12.47 kV/720 V
Other loads
Other loads
46 kV
PCC
Utility metering
Figure 6.29
Steel-grinding facility one-line diagram showing
source, metering, and loads.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

formed. The resulting impedance characteristic is shown in Fig. 6.31.
The scan indicated that the dominant resonance frequency was approx-
imately at the 34th harmonic. When the frequency components pro-
duced by a nonlinear load line up with the system natural frequency,
the distortion will be magnified. This is exactly what happened in this
problem. The interharmonic frequencies produced by the induction fur-
naces varied between 25th and 34th harmonics, the upper end of this
range coinciding with the system natural frequency. Thus, it was not
surprising to find voltage distortion over a wide area.
Since the high-frequency distortion varied with time and the system
frequency response accentuated the distortion, solutions employing
single-tuned shunt filters (even with multiple stages) would not work.
There were two possible filter solutions:
1. Modifying the frequency response at the 46-kV bus so that its nat-
ural frequency did not align with the induction furnace interhar-
monic frequencies
2. Placing a broadband filter at the facility main bus to prevent the dis-
torted currents from entering the 46-kV system
The first approach requires a careful selection of a 46-kV capacitor
bank. The new frequency response should not contain any resonance
278
Chapter Six
0
10
20
Time (ms)
Voltage (V)
30
40
–40000
40000
–20000
0
20000
Figure 6.30
Voltage waveform at the PCC for steel-grinding facility (46 kV).
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

that aligns with a harmonic produced by the nonlinear loads. With sim-
ulations, it was estimated that a capacitor bank of approximately 3
Mvar would be required to move the existing system natural frequency
from the 35th harmonic down to the 8th harmonic. The eighth har-
monic was selected since there were no known nonlinear loads produc-
ing harmonic currents of this order. This solution was feasible;
however, installing a 3-Mvar capacitor bank would be overcompensat-
ing much of the time. In addition, if the target tuning drops below the
eighth harmonic due to line outages that would weaken the system,
there is increased risk of causing problems with the fifth and seventh
harmonics.
The second approach requires a mechanism to prevent high-fre-
quency interharmonics from entering the 46-kV system. As described
in the first approach, multiple stages of single-tuned shunt filter banks
would not work well since the interharmonics are varying. Active fil-
ters would solve the problem; however, they are expensive. A more eco-
nomical solution would be a low-pass broadband filter like that
described in Sec. 6.5. Also, there is more control over the short-circuit
impedance at the filter location. The solution is illustrated in Fig. 6.32.
It is easy to accomplish the attenuation of frequencies above the 30th
harmonic with this approach. The problem is to find a capacitor size
that will not result in a resonance that aligns with other harmonic fre-
Applied Harmonics
279
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Impedance
Frequency
Figure 6.31
Impedance scan at the PCC (46 kV).
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

quencies produced by the furnaces, particularly, the 5th, 7th, 11th, and
13th. The eighth harmonic was again chosen as a target tuning fre-
quency. The next best frequency might be the fourth harmonic; how-
ever, the resulting voltage rise due to a larger capacitor bank size
would require adding a voltage regulator to buck the voltage down.
This would make the solution much more costly.
It was determined by simulation that a common 1200-kvar bank
rated at 13.2 kV provides a good solution. Using a capacitor rated higher
than nominal shifts the tuning slightly higher, giving less magnification
of the seventh harmonic. Figure 6.33 shows the current flowing toward
the PCC for 1 A of current. The high-frequency interharmonic currents
above the 30th harmonic are greatly attenuated and are prevented from
flowing through the transformer into the 46-kV system.
Figure 6.34 shows the resulting voltage waveform at the PCC. While
some minor distortion remains (mostly fifth and seventh harmonics),
this is acceptable. Thus, this problem can be solved simply by applying
a relatively inexpensive, commonly available capacitor bank.
280
Chapter Six
PCC
46 kV/12.47 kV
(a)
(b)
3000 A
2000 A
Equivalent injected
current source
PCC
Figure 6.32
Solution at the 12.47-kV side (a) and its equivalent low-pass
broadband filter effect (b).
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Applied Harmonics
281
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Harmonic number
Baseline of 1-A current
Current flowing toward the PCC
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Figure 6.33
Current flowing toward the PCC when 1 A of current at
various frequencies was injected from the 12.47-kV bus.
0
10
20
Time (ms)
30
40
Voltage (V)
–40000
–20000
0
20000
40000
Figure 6.34
Voltage waveform at the PCC after installing a 1200-kvar bank rated at 
13.2 kV at the 12.47-kV bus.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

6.8
Standards on Harmonics
There are various organizations on the national and international lev-
els working in concert with engineers, equipment manufacturers, and
research organizations to come up with standards governing guide-
lines, recommended practices, and harmonic limits. The primary
objective of the standards is to provide a common ground for all
involved parties to work together to ensure compatibility between
end-use equipment and the system equipment is applied. An example
of compatibility (or lack of compatibility) between end-use equipment
and the system equipment is the fast-clock problem in the case study
given in Sec. 6.7.2. The end-use equipment is the clock with voltage
zero-crossing detection technology, while the system yields a voltage
distorted with harmonics between 30th and 35th. This illustrates a
mismatch of compatibility that causes misoperation of the end-use
equipment.
This section focuses on standards governing harmonic limits, includ-
ing IEEE 519-1992, IEC 61000-2-2, IEC 61000-3-2, IEC 61000-3-4, IEC
61000-3-6, NRS 048-2,13 and EN50160.14
6.8.1
IEEE Standard 519-1992
The limits on harmonic voltage and current based on IEEE Standard
519-1992 are described in Sec. 6.1. It should be emphasized that the
philosophy behind this standard seeks to limit the harmonic injection
from individual customers so that they do not create unacceptable volt-
age distortion under normal system characteristics and to limit the
overall harmonic distortion in the voltage supplied by the utility. The
voltage and current distortion limits should be used as system design
values for the worst case of normal operating conditions lasting more
than 1 h. For shorter periods, such as during start-ups, the limits may
be exceeded by 50 percent.
This standard divides the responsibility for limiting harmonics
between both end users and the utility. End users will be responsible for
limiting the harmonic current injections, while the utility will be pri-
marily responsible for limiting voltage distortion in the supply system.
The harmonic current and voltage limits are applied at the PCC.
This is the point where other customers share the same bus or where
new customers may be connected in the future. The standard seeks a
fair approach to allocating a harmonic limit quota for each customer.
The standard allocates current injection limits based on the size of
the load with respect to the size of the power system, which is defined
by its short-circuit capacity. The short-circuit ratio is defined as the
ratio of the maximum short-circuit current at the PCC to the maxi-
282
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

mum demand load current (fundamental frequency component) at the
PCC as well.
The basis for limiting harmonic injections from individual customers
is to avoid unacceptable levels of voltage distortions. Thus the current
limits are developed so that the total harmonic injections from an indi-
vidual customer do not exceed the maximum voltage distortion shown
in Table 6.6.
Table 6.6 shows harmonic current limits for various system voltages.
Smaller loads (typically larger short-circuit ratio values) are allowed a
higher percentage of harmonic currents than larger loads with smaller
short-circuit ratio values. Larger loads have to meet more stringent
limits since they occupy a larger portion of system load capacity. The
current limits take into account the diversity of harmonic currents in
which some harmonics tend to cancel out while others are additive.
The harmonic current limits at the PCC are developed to limit indi-
vidual voltage distortion and voltage THD to the values shown in Table
6.1. Since voltage distortion is dependent on the system impedance, the
key to controlling voltage distortion is to control the impedance. The
two main conditions that result in high impedance are when the sys-
tem is too weak to supply the load adequately or the system is in reso-
nance. The latter is more common. Therefore, keeping the voltage
distortion low usually means keeping the system out of resonance.
Occasionally, new transformers and lines will have to be added to
increase the system strength.
IEEE Standard 519-1992 represents a consensus of guidelines and
recommended practices by the utilities and their customers in mini-
mizing and controlling the impact of harmonics generated by nonlinear
loads.
Applied Harmonics
283
TABLE 6.6
Basis for Harmonic Current Limits
Maximum individual
Short-circuit
frequency voltage
ratio at PCC
harmonic (%)
Related assumption
10
2.5–3.0
Dedicated system
20
2.0–2.5
1–2 large customers
50
1.0–1.5
A few relatively large customers
100
0.5–1.0
5–20 medium-size customers
1000
0.05–0.10
Many small customers
SOURCE: From IEEE Standard 519-1992, table 10.1.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

6.8.2
Overview of IEC standards on
harmonics
The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), currently with
headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland, has defined a category of elec-
tromagnetic compatibility (EMC) standards that deal with power qual-
ity issues. The term electromagnetic compatibility includes concerns for
both radiated and conducted interference with end-use equipment. The
IEC standards are broken down into six parts:
■Part 1: General.
These standards deal with general considerations
such as introduction, fundamental principles, rationale, definitions,
and terminologies. They can also describe the application and inter-
pretation of fundamental definitions and terms. Their designation
number is IEC 61000-1-x.
■Part 2: Environment.
These standards define characteristics of the
environment where equipment will be applied, the classification of
such environment, and its compatibility levels. Their designation
number is IEC 61000-2-x.
■Part 3: Limits.
These standards define the permissible levels of
emissions that can be generated by equipment connected to the envi-
ronment. They set numerical emission limits and also immunity lim-
its. Their designation number is IEC 61000-3-x.
■Part 4: Testing and measurement techniques.
These standards pro-
vide detailed guidelines for measurement equipment and test proce-
dures to ensure compliance with the other parts of the standards.
Their designation number is IEC 61000-4-x.
■Part 5: Installation and mitigation guidelines.
These standards
provide guidelines in application of equipment such as earthing and
cabling of electrical and electronic systems for ensuring electromag-
netic compatibility among electrical and electronic apparatus or sys-
tems. They also describe protection concepts for civil facilities
against the high-altitude electromagnetic pulse (HEMP) due to high-
altitude nuclear explosions. They are designated with IEC 61000-5-
x.
■Part 6: Miscellaneous.
These standards are generic standards
defining immunity and emission levels required for equipment in
general categories or for specific types of equipment. Their designa-
tion number is IEC 61000-6-x.
IEC standards relating to harmonics generally fall in parts 2 and 3.
Unlike the IEEE standards on harmonics where there is only a single
publication covering all issues related to harmonics, IEC standards on
harmonics are separated into several publications. There are stan-
284
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

dards dealing with environments and limits which are further broken
down based on the voltage and current levels. These key standards are
as follows:
■IEC 61000-2-2 (1993): Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC). Part 2:
Environment. Section 2: Compatibility Levels for Low-Frequency
Conducted Disturbances and Signaling in Public Low-Voltage Power
Supply Systems.
■IEC 61000-3-2 (2000): Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC). Part 3:
Limits. Section 2: Limits for Harmonic Current Emissions
(Equipment Input Current Up to and Including 16 A per Phase).
■IEC 61000-3-4 (1998): Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC). Part 3:
Limits. Section 4: Limitation of Emission of Harmonic Currents in
Low-Voltage Power Supply Systems for Equipment with Rated
Current Greater Than 16 A.
■IEC 61000-3-6 (1996): Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC). Part 3:
Limits. Section 6: Assessment of Emission Limits for Distorting
Loads in MV and HV Power Systems. Basic EMC publication.
Prior to 1997, these standards were designated by a 1000 series num-
bering scheme. For example, IEC 61000-2-2 was known as IEC 1000-2-
2. These standards on harmonics are generally adopted by the
European Community (CENELEC); thus, they are also designated
with the EN 61000 series. For example, IEC 61000-3-2 is also known
as EN 61000-3-2.
6.8.3
IEC 61000-2-2
IEC 61000-2-2 defines compatibility levels for low-frequency con-
ducted disturbances and signaling in public low-voltage power supply
systems such as 50- or 60-Hz single- and three-phase systems with
nominal voltage up 240 and 415 V, respectively. Compatibility levels
are defined empirically such that they reduce the number of com-
plaints of misoperation to an acceptable level.15 These levels are not
rigid and can be exceeded in a few exceptional conditions.
Compatibility levels for individual harmonic voltages in the low-volt-
age network are shown in Table 6.7. They are given in percentage of
the fundamental voltage.
6.8.4
IEC 61000-3-2 and IEC 61000-3-4
Both IEC 61000-3-2 and 61000-3-4 define limits for harmonic current
emission from equipment drawing input current of up to and including
16 A per phase and larger than 16 A per phase, respectively. These stan-
dards are aimed at limiting harmonic emissions from equipment con-
Applied Harmonics
285
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

nected to the low-voltage public network so that compliance with the
limits ensures that the voltage in the public network satisfies the com-
patibility limits defined in IEC 61000-2-2.
The IEC 61000-3-2 is an outgrowth from IEC 555-2 (EN 60555-2).
The standard classifies equipment into four categories:
■Class A: Balanced three-phase equipment and all other equipment
not belonging to classes B, C, and D
■Class B: Portable tools
■Class C: Lighting equipment including dimming devices
■Class D: Equipment having an input current with a “special wave-
shape” and an active input power of less than 600 W
Figure 6.35 can be used for classifying equipment in IEC 61000-3-2.
It should be noted that equipment in classes B and C and provision-
ally motor-driven equipment are not considered class D equipment
regardless of their input current waveshapes. The half-cycle wave-
shape of class D equipment input current should be within the enve-
lope of the inverted T-shape shown in Fig. 6.36 for at least 95 percent
of the time. The center line at 	/2 lines up with the peak value of the
input current Ipk.
Maximum permissible harmonic currents for classes A, B, C, and D
are given in actual amperage measured at the input current of the
equipment. Note that harmonic current limits for class B equipment
are 150 percent of those in class A. Harmonic current limits according
286
Chapter Six
TABLE 6.7
Compatibility Levels for Individual Harmonic Voltages
in the Low-Voltage Public Network According to IEC 61000-2-2*
Not multiple of 3
Multiple of 3
Odd 
Harmonic
Odd
Harmonic
Even
Harmonic
order
voltage
order
voltage
order
voltage
h
(%)
h
(%)
h
(%)
5
6
3
5
2
2
7
5
9
1.5
4
1
11
3.5
15
0.3
6
0.5
13
3
21
0.2
8
0.5
17
2
21
0.2
10
0.2
19
1.5
12
0.2
23
1.5
12
0.2
25
1.5
25
0.2 
 1.3  25/h
*The THD of the supply voltage including all harmonics up to the 40th
order shall be less than 8 percent.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

to IEC 61000-3-2 are shown in Tables 6.8 through 6.10. Note that har-
monic current limits for class D equipment are specified in absolute
numbers and in values relative to active power. The limits only apply
to equipment operating at input power up to 600 W.
IEC 61000-3-4 limits emissions from equipment drawing input cur-
rent larger than 16 A and up to 75 A. Connections of this type of equip-
ment do not require consent from the utility. Harmonic current limits
based on this standard are shown in Table 6.11.
Applied Harmonics
287
Equipment
having the special
waveshape and
P < 600 W
Balanced
three-phase
equipment?
Portable
tool?
Portable
tool?
Lighting
equipment?
Class
B
Class
C
Class
D
Class
D
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Figure 6.35
Flowchart for classifying equipment according to IEC 61000-3-2.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

6.8.5
IEC 61000-3-6
IEC 61000-3-6 specifies limits of harmonic current emission for equip-
ment connected to medium-voltage (MV) and high-voltage (HV) supply
systems. In the context of the standard, MV and HV refer to voltages
between 1 and 35 kV, and between 35 and 230 kV, respectively. A volt-
288
Chapter Six
1
i/Ipk
0.35
0
0
	/3
	/3
	/2
	/3
M
t
	
Figure 6.36
Envelope of the input current to define the special wave-
shape for class D equipment.
TABLE 6.8
Harmonic Current Limits for Class A Equipment
Max. permissible 
harmonic 
Max. permissible
Odd order h
current order (A)
Even order h
harmonic order (A)
3
2.3
2
1.08
5
1.14
4
0.43
7
0.77
6
0.3
9
0.4
8–40
0.23  8/h
11
0.33
13
0.21
15–39
0.15  15/h
TABLE 6.9
Harmonic Current Limits for 
Class C Equipment
Max. permissible harmonic 
Harmonic order h
current* (%)
2
2
3
30  circuit power factor
5
10
7
7
9
5
11–39
3
*Percent of the fundamental input current.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

age higher than 230 kV is considered extra high voltage (EHV), while
a voltage less than 1 kV is considered low voltage (LV).
The standard argues that emission limits for individual equipment
connected to the MV and HV systems should be evaluated on the volt-
age distortion basis. This is to ensure that harmonic current injections
from harmonic-producing equipment do not result in excess voltage
distortion levels. The standard provides compatibility levels and plan-
ning levels for harmonic voltages in the LV and MV systems. The com-
patibility level refers to a level where the compatibility between the
equipment and its environment is achieved. The compatibility level is
usually established empirically so that a piece of equipment is compat-
ible with its environment most of the time. Compatibility levels are gen-
erally based on the 95 percent probability level, i.e., 95 percent of the
time, the compatibility can be achieved. Table 6.12 shows compatibility
levels for harmonic voltages as a percentage of the fundamental volt-
age in both LV and MV system.
Applied Harmonics
289
TABLE 6.10
Harmonic Current Limits for 
Class D Equipment
Max. permissible 
harmonic current
Harmonic order h
Per watt (mA/W)
(A)
2
3.4
2.3
5
1.9
1.14
7
1.0
0.77
9
0.50
0.40
13
0.35
0.33
11–39
3.86/h
See Table 6.8
TABLE 6.11
Harmonic Current Limits According to IEC 61000-3-4
Harmonic
Max. permissible
Harmonic
Max. permissible 
order h
harmonic current* (%)
order h
harmonic current* (%)
3
21.6
19
1.1
5
10.7
21
0.6
7
7.2
23
0.9
9
3.8
25
0.8
11
3.1
27
0.6
13
2
29
0.7
15
0.7
31
0.7
17
1.2
33
0.6
*Percent of the fundamental input current.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Planning levels are design criteria or levels specified by the utility
company. Planning levels are more stringent than compatibility levels.
Thus, their levels are lower than the compatibility levels. Planning lev-
els for harmonic voltage expressed in the percentage of the fundamental
voltage for MV, HV, and EHV systems are given in Tables 6.13 and 6.14.
290
Chapter Six
TABLE 6.12
Compatibility Levels for Harmonic Voltages (in Percent of
Fundamental) for LV and MV Systems
Odd harmonics
Not multiple of 3
Multiple of 3
Even harmonics
Harmonic 
Harmonic 
Harmonic 
Order h
voltage (%)
Order h
voltage (%)
Order h
voltage (%)
5
6
3
5
2
2
7
5
9
1.5
4
1
11
3.5
15
0.3
6
0.5
13
3
21
0.2
8
0.5
17
2
21
0.2
10
0.5
19
1.5
12
0.2
23
1.5
12
0.2
25
1.5
25
0.2 
 1.3  25/h
*Limit for total harmonic distortion (THD) is 8 percent.
TABLE 6.13
Planning Levels for Harmonic Voltages (in Percent of
Fundamental) for MV Systems
Odd harmonics
Not multiple of 3
Multiple of 3
Even harmonics
Harmonic 
Harmonic 
Harmonic 
Order h
voltage (%)
Order h
voltage (%)
Order h
voltage (%)
5
5
3
4
2
1.6
7
4
9
1.2
4
1
11
3
15
0.3
6
0.5
13
2.5
21
0.2
8
0.4
17
1.6
21
0.2
10
0.4
19
1.2
12
0.2
23
1.2
12
0.2
25
1.2
25
0.2 
 0.5  25/h
*Limit for total harmonic distortion is 6.5 percent.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The IEC 61000-3-6 provides evaluation guidelines to determine
admissibility of equipment connected to MV and HV systems. There
are three stages for evaluating equipment admissibility:
■Stage 1.
Simplified evaluation of disturbance emission
■Stage 2.
Emission limits relative to actual network characteristics
■Stage 3.
Acceptance of higher emission levels on an exceptional and
precarious basis
In stage 1, equipment can be connected to MV or HV systems with-
out conducting harmonic studies as long as its size is considered small
in relation to the system short-circuit capacity. For small appliances,
manufacturers are responsible for limiting their harmonic emissions.
If the equipment does meet stage 1 criteria, the harmonic character-
istics of the equipment should be evaluated in detail along with the
available system absorption capacity. Upon evaluation, individual
equipment will be allocated with appropriate system absorption capac-
ity according to its size. Thus, if the system absorption capacity has
been fully allocated to all equipment, and this equipment injects its
harmonic currents up to its limits, the system voltage distortion should
be within its planning levels.
If equipment does not meet stage 2 criteria, it may be allowed to be
connected to the system if the end user and utility agree to make spe-
cial arrangement to facilitate such a connection.
Applied Harmonics
291
TABLE 6.14
Planning Levels for Harmonic Voltages (in Percent of
Fundamental) for HV and EHV Systems
Odd harmonics
Not multiple of 3
Multiple of 3
Even harmonics
Harmonic 
Harmonic 
Harmonic 
Order h
voltage (%)
Order h
voltage (%)
Order h
voltage (%)
5
2
3
2
2
1.6
7
2
9
1
4
1
11
1.5
15
0.3
6
0.5
13
1.5
21
0.2
8
0.4
17
1
21
0.2
10
0.4
19
1
12
0.2
23
0.7
12
0.2
25
0.7
25
0.2 
 0.5  25/h
*Limit for total harmonic distortion is 6.5 percent.
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

6.8.6
NRS 048-02
The Quality of Supply Standard, NRS 048, is the South African stan-
dard for dealing with the quality of electricity supply and has been
implemented since July 1, 1997. This standard requires electricity sup-
pliers to measure and report their quality of supply to the National
Electricity Regulator.
The NRS 048 is divided into five parts. It is, perhaps, the most thor-
ough standard dealing with all aspects of quality of supply. It covers the
minimum standards of quality of supply (QOS), measurement and
reporting of QOS, application and implementation guidelines for QOS,
and instrumentation for voltage quality monitoring and recording.
Part 2 of NRS 048 sets minimum standards for the quality of the
electrical product supplied by South African utilities to end users. The
minimum standards include limits for voltage harmonics and inter-
harmonics, voltage flicker, voltage unbalance, voltage dips, voltage reg-
ulation, and frequency.
NRS 048-02 adopts IEC 61000-2-2 harmonic voltage limits shown in
Table 6.7 as its compatibility standards for LV and MV systems. For South
African systems, the nominal voltage for LV systems is less than 1 kV,
while the nominal voltage for MV systems ranges between 1 and 44 kV.
NRS 048 has not established limits for harmonic voltages for HV sys-
tems yet. However, it adopts IEC 61000-3-6 planning levels for har-
monic voltages for HV and EHV systems (shown in Table 6.14) as its
recommended planning limits for HV systems (the nominal voltage is
between 200 and 400 kV).
6.8.7
EN 50160
EN 50160 is a European standard for dealing with supply quality
requirements for European utilities. The standard defines specific lev-
els of voltage characteristics that must be met by utilities and methods
for evaluating compliance. EN 50160 was approved by the European
Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC) in 1994.
EN 50160 specifies voltage characteristics at the customer’s supply
terminals or in public LV and MV electricity distribution systems under
normal operating conditions. In other words, EN 50160 confines itself to
voltage characteristics at the PCC and does not specify requirements for
power quality within the supply system or within customer facilities.
Harmonic voltage limits for EN 50160 are given in percentage of the
fundamental voltage. The limits apply to systems supplied at both LV
and MV levels, i.e., from a nominal 230 V up to 35 kV. Medium voltage
is between 1 and 35 kV. The harmonic voltage limits are shown in Table
6.15. The total harmonic distortion of the supply voltage including all
harmonics up to order 40 should not exceed 8 percent. Values for
292
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

higher-order harmonics are not specified since they are too small to use
as a practical measure to establish a meaningful reference value.
Note that limits in EN 50160 are nearly identical to the IEC 61000-
3-6 compatibility levels for harmonic voltages for its corresponding LV
and MV systems, except for the absence of higher-order harmonic lim-
its in EN 50160.
6.9
References
1. M. F. McGranaghan, “Overview of the Guide for Applying Harmonic Limits on Power
Systems—IEEE P519A,” Eighth International Conference on Harmonics and Quality
of Power, ICHQP 1998, Athens, Greece, pp. 462–469.
2. IEEE 519-1992, Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic Control in
Electric Power Systems.
3. IEEE P519A-2000, Guide for Applying Harmonic Limits on Power Systems.
4. R. C. Dugan, “Simulation of Arc Furnace Power Systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Industry Applications, November/December 1980, pp. 813–818.
5. M. F. McGranaghan, J. H. Shaw, R. E. Owen, “Measuring Voltage and Current
Harmonics on Distribution Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and
Systems, Vol. 101, No. 7, July 1981.
6. M. F. McGranaghan, R. C. Dugan, and W. L. Sponsler, “Digital Simulation of
Distribution System Frequency Response Characteristics,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Apparatus and Systems, Vol. 101, No. 3, March 1981.
7. M. F. McGranaghan, E. W. Gunther, “Design of a PC-Based Harmonic Simulation
Program,” Second International Conference on Harmonics in Power Systems,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, October 1986.
8. D. Xia, G. T. Heydt, “Harmonic Power Flow Studies Part I—Formulation and
Solution,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, June 1982, pp.
1257–1265.
9. W. M. Grady, “Harmonic Power Flow Studies,” Ph.D. thesis, Purdue University, May
1983.
10. M. M. Swamy, “Harmonic Reduction Using Broad Band Harmonic Filters,” MTE
Corporation Technical Articles, Menomonee Falls, Wisconsin.
11. R. Dwyer, H. V. Nguyen, S. G. Ashmore, “C Filters for Wide-bandwidth Harmonic
Attenuation with Low Losses,” Conference Record, IEEE Power Engineering Society
Meeting, Winter 2000, Singapore.
Applied Harmonics
293
TABLE 6.15
Harmonic Voltage Limits at the Supply Terminals
Odd harmonics
Not multiple of 3
Multiple of 3
Even harmonics
Harmonic 
Harmonic 
Harmonic 
Order h
voltage (%)
Order h
voltage (%)
Order h
voltage (%)
5
6
3
5
2
2
7
5
9
1.5
4
1
11
3.5
15
0.3
6–24 
0.5
13
3
21
0.2
17
2
19
1.5
23
1.5
25
1.5
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

12. J. M. Frank, “Origin, Development and Design of K-Factor Transformers,”
Conference Record, 1994 IEEE Industry Applications Society Annual Meeting,
Denver, October 1994, pp. 2273–2274.
13. NRS 048, Electricity Supply—The Quality of Supply Standard.
14. EN 50160, Voltage Characteristics of Electricity Supplied by Public Distribution
Systems.
15. IEC 61000-1-4, Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC): “Rationale for Limiting
Power-Frequency Conducted Harmonic and Interharmonic Current Emissions from
Equipment, in the Frequency Range up to 9 kHz.”
6.10
Bibliography
Dwyer, R. V., Gunther, E. W., Adapa, R. “A Comparison of Solution Techniques for the
Calculation of Harmonic Distortion Due to Adjustable Speed DC Drives,” Fourth
International Conference on Harmonic Systems, Budapest, Hungary, October 1990.
Grebe, T. E., McGranaghan, M. F., Samotyj, M. “Solving Harmonic Problems in
Industrial Plants and Harmonic Mitigation Techniques for Adjustable-Speed Drives,”
Electrotech 92, Montreal, Canada, 1992.
McGranaghan, M. F., Grebe, T. E., Samotyj, M. “Solving Harmonic Problems in
Industrial Plants—Case Studies,” First International Conference on Power Quality,
PQA ’91, Paris, France, 1991.
McGranaghan, M. F., Mueller, D. R. “Designing Harmonic Filters for Adjustable-Speed
Drives to Comply with New IEEE-519 Harmonic Limits,” IEEE/IAS Annual
Conference, Petroleum and Chemical Industry Technical Conference, 1993.
Schwabe, R. J., Melhorn, C. J., Samotyj, M. “Effect of High Efficiency Lighting on Power
Quality in Public Buildings,” Third International Conference on Power Quality, PQA
’93, San Diego, Calif.
Zavadil, R., McGranaghan, M. F., Hensley, G., Johnson, K. “Analysis of Harmonic
Distortion Levels in Commercial Buildings,” First International Conference on Power
Quality, PQA ’91, Paris, France, 1991.
294
Chapter Six
Applied Harmonics
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

295
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Utilities generally try to maintain the service voltage supplied to an
end user within ±5 percent of nominal. Under emergency conditions,
for short periods, ANSI Standard C84.1 permits the utilization voltage
to be in the range of 6 to 13 percent of the nominal voltage. Some
sensitive loads have more stringent voltage limits for proper operation
and, of course, equipment generally operates more efficiently at near
nominal voltage. This chapter addresses the fundamental problems
behind voltage regulation and the general types of devices available to
correct the problem.
7.1
Principles of Regulating the Voltage
The root cause of most voltage regulation problems is that there is too
much impedance in the power system to properly supply the load (Fig.
7.1). Another way of describing this is to say that the power system is
too weak for the load. Therefore, the voltage drops too low under heavy
load. Conversely, when the source voltage is boosted to overcome the
impedance, there can be an overvoltage condition when the load drops
too low. The corrective measures usually involve either compensating
for the impedance Z or compensating for the voltage drop IR  jIX
caused by the impedance.
Some common options for improving power system voltage regula-
tion, in the approximate order of priority that a utility might apply, are
1. Add shunt capacitors to reduce the current I and shift it to be more
in phase with the voltage.
2. Add voltage regulators, which boost the apparent V1.
3. Reconductor lines to a larger size to reduce the impedance Z.
Chapter7
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

4. Change substation or service transformers to larger sizes to reduce
impedance Z.
5. Add some kind of dynamic reactive power (var) compensation, which
serves the same purpose as capacitors for rapidly changing loads.
6. Add series capacitors to cancel the inductive impedance drop IX.
7.2
Devices for Voltage Regulation
There are a variety of voltage regulation devices in use on utility and
industrial power systems. We have divided these into three major
classes:
1. Tap-changing transformers
2. Isolation devices with separate voltage regulators
3. Impedance compensation devices, such as capacitors
There are both mechanical and electronic tap-changing transform-
ers. Tap-changing transformers are often autotransformer designs,
although two- and three-winding transformers may also be equipped
with tap changers. The mechanical devices are for the slower-changing
loads, while the electronic ones can respond very quickly to voltage
changes.
Isolation devices include UPS systems, ferroresonant (constant-volt-
age) transformers, and motor-generator sets. These are devices that
essentially isolate the load from the power source by performing some
sort of energy conversion. Therefore, the load side of the device can be
296
Chapter Seven
Z = R + jX
I
V1
V2
V1
IR
IX
V2
I
LOAD
Figure 7.1
Voltage drop across the system
impedance is the root cause of voltage regula-
tion problems.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

separately regulated and can maintain constant voltage regardless of
what is occurring at the power supply. The downside of using such
devices is that they are costly, introduce more losses, and can cause
harmonic distortion problems on the power supply system.
Shunt capacitors help maintain the voltage by reducing the current
in the lines. Also, by overcompensating inductive circuits, a voltage rise
can be achieved. To maintain a more constant voltage, the capacitors
can be switched in conjunction with the load, sometimes in small incre-
mental steps to follow the load more closely. If the objective is simply to
maintain the voltage at a higher value to avoid an undervoltage condi-
tion, the capacitors are often fixed (not switched).
Series capacitors are relatively rare in utility distribution systems,
but are useful for some impulse loads like rock crushers and tire
testers.1 Many potential users will shy away from them because of the
extra care in engineering required for the series capacitor installation
to function properly. However, they are very effective in certain system
conditions, primarily with rapidly changing large loads that are caus-
ing excessive flicker (voltage fluctuations).
The series capacitors compensate for most of the inductance in the
system leading up to the load. If the system is highly inductive, this
will represent a significant reduction in the impedance. If the system
is not highly inductive, but has a high proportion of resistance, series
capacitors will not be very effective. This is typically the case in many
industrial plant power systems that have long lengths of cable
between the transformer and the load. To achieve a significant reduc-
tion in the impedance, the size of the cables and transformers must be
increased.
Another approach to flicker-causing loads is to apply devices that are
commonly called static var compensators. These can react within a few
cycles to maintain a nearly constant voltage by rapidly controlling the
reactive power production. Such devices are commonly used on arc fur-
naces, stone crushers, and other randomly varying loads where the sys-
tem is weak and the resulting voltage fluctuations are affecting nearby
customers.
7.2.1
Utility step-voltage regulators
The typical utility tap-changing regulator can regulate from 10 to
10 percent of the incoming line voltage in 32 steps of 5/8 percent.
There are some variations, but the majority are of this type.
Distribution substation transformers commonly have three-phase
load tap changers (LTCs) while line regulators installed out on the
feeders are typically single-phase in North America. When installed
on a three-phase feeder, line regulators are generally installed in
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
297
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

banks of three. However, there are also many installations of open-
delta regulator banks on lightly loaded three-phase feeders branches.
This requires only two regulators and is less costly than a full three-
phase bank.
Figure 7.2 shows a schematic of a utility step-voltage regulator.
Although the concept of a tap-changing autotransformer is simple, a
utility voltage regulator is a fairly complicated apparatus in order to
achieve a durable and highly reliable tap-changing mechanism.
Utility line voltage regulators and substation LTCs are relatively
slow. The time delay when the voltage goes out of band is at least 15 s
and is commonly 30 or 45 s. Thus, it is of little benefit where voltages
may vary in matters of cycles or seconds. Their main application is
boosting voltage on long feeders where the load is changing slowly over
several minutes or hours. The voltage band typically ranges from 1.5 to
3.0 V on a 120-V base. The control can be set to maintain voltage at
some point downline from the feeder by using the line drop compen-
sator. This results in a more level average voltage response and helps
prevent overvoltages on customers near the regulator.
7.2.2
Ferroresonant transformers
On the end-user side, ferroresonant transformers are not only useful
in protecting equipment from voltage sags (see Chap. 3), but they can
298
Chapter Seven
LOWER
SERIES
WINDING
BRIDGING
REACTOR
RAISE
SOURCE
SIDE
LOAD
SIDE
MAIN
SHUNT
WINDING
Figure 7.2
Schematic diagram of one type of utility volt-
age regulator commonly applied on distribution lines.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

also be used to attain very good voltage regulation (±1 percent out-
put). Figure 7.3 shows the steady-state input/output characteristics
of a 120-VA ferroresonant transformer with a 15-VA load. As the input
voltage is reduced down to 30 V, the output voltage stays constant. If
the input voltage is reduced further, the output voltage begins to col-
lapse. In addition, as the input voltage is reduced, the current drawn
by the ferroresonant transformer increases substantially from 0.4 
to 2 A. Thus, ferroresonant transformers tend to be lossy and 
inefficient.
7.2.3
Electronic tap-switching regulators
Electronic tap-switching regulators (Fig. 7.4) can also be used to regu-
late voltage. They are more efficient than ferroresonant transformers
and use SCRs or triacs to quickly change taps, and hence voltage. Tap-
switching regulators have a very fast response time of a half cycle and
are popular for medium-power applications.
7.2.4
Magnetic synthesizers
Magnetic synthesizers, although intended for short-duration voltage
sags (see Chap. 3), can also be used for steady-state voltage regula-
tion. One manufacturer, for example, states that for input voltages 
of ±40 percent, the output voltage will remain within ±5 percent at
full load.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
299
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2
(Amps)
Current
Output Voltage
Input Current
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
(Volts)
Voltage
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Input Voltage (Volts)
120-VA Ferroresonant Transformer with
15-VA Process Controller Load
Figure 7.3
Ferroresonant transformer steady-state characteristics.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

7.2.5
On-line UPS systems
On-line UPS systems intended for protection against sags and brief
interruptions can also be used for voltage regulation provided the
source voltage stays sufficiently high to keep the batteries charged.
This is a common solution for small, critical computer or electronic con-
trol loads in an industrial environment that has large, fluctuating
loads causing the voltage to vary.
7.2.6
Motor-generator sets
Motor-generator sets (Fig. 7.5) are also used for voltage regulation.
They completely decouple the load from the electric power system,
shielding the load from electrical transients. Voltage regulation is pro-
vided by the generator control. The major drawback of motor-generator
sets is their response time to large load changes. Motor-generator sets
can take several seconds to bring the voltage back up to the required
level, making this device too slow for voltage regulation of certain
loads, especially rapidly varying loads. Motor-generator sets can also
be used to provide “ride through” from input voltage variations, espe-
cially voltage sags, by storing energy in a flywheel.
7.2.7
Static var compensators
Static var compensators can be applied to either utility systems or
industrial systems. They help regulate the voltage by responding very
quickly to supply or consume reactive power. This acts with the system
impedance to either raise or lower the voltage on a cycle-by-cycle basis.
300
Chapter Seven
LINE IN
TRIACS
AUTOTRANSFORMER
SENSING
AND
CONTROL
LOAD
Figure 7.4
Electronic tap-switching regulator.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

There are two main types of static var compensators in common
usage, as shown in Fig. 7.6. The thyristor-controlled reactor (TCR)
scheme is probably the most common. It employs a fixed capacitor bank
to provide leading reactive power and a thyristor-controlled inductance
that is gated on in various amounts to cancel all or part of the capaci-
tance. The capacitors are frequently configured as filters to clean up
the harmonic distortion caused by the thyristors.
The thyristor-switched capacitor operates by switching multiple
steps of capacitors quickly to match the load requirements as closely as
possible. This is a more coarse regulation than a TCR but is often ade-
quate. The capacitors are generally gated fully on so there are no har-
monics in the currents. The switching point is controlled so that there
are no switching transients.
7.3
Utility Voltage Regulator Application
Figure 7.7 shows a photograph of a typical three-phase 32-step voltage
regulator bank used by U.S. utilities. While this photo shows a substa-
tion installation, single-phase regulators are frequently pole-mounted,
either one to a single pole or three on a platform between two poles.
They may be connected in wye-grounded, leading delta, lagging delta,
or open delta. The controls are integral to the device and each phase is
generally controlled separately. Features on some regulator controls
allow for ganged operation of all three phases such that all regulators
are on the same tap.
It should be noted that ganged operation does not necessarily mean
the voltage phase balance will be better. Utility distribution lines are
commonly unbalanced in their construction and no attempt is made to
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
301
FLYWHEEL FOR
MECHANICAL
ENERGY STORAGE
GENERATOR
INDUCTION OR
SYNCHRONOUS MOTOR
Figure 7.5
Motor-generator set.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

302
Chapter Seven
3RD
5TH
7TH
LOAD
LOAD
THYRISTOR-CONTROLLED REACTOR
THYRISTOR-SWITCHED CAPACITOR
Figure 7.6
Common static var compensator
configurations.
Figure 7.7
Typical utility three-phase 32-step voltage regulator bank. (Courtesy of Cooper
Power Systems.)
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

transpose them. Also, numerous single-phase loads create significant
imbalance in the phase currents. Therefore, three independently con-
trolled regulators may very well yield better balance between the phase
voltages than ganged operation.
Volumes could be written on the application of regulators, but we will
restrict our discussion here to a few topics particularly relevant to power
quality: use of the line drop compensator for leveling voltage profiles and
load rejection with respect to the application of regulators in series.
7.3.1
Line drop compensator
Regulators are very effective in alleviating low-voltage conditions on
distribution feeders when the load has outgrown the capability of the
feeder at peak load conditions. Because it is time-consuming to deter-
mine the correct settings for line drop compensation, the R and X set-
tings are often set to zero and the voltage regulation set point is set
near the maximum allowable (125 or 126 V on a 120-V base). This
results in the feeder voltage being near the maximum most of the time
because the load is at peak for only a small percentage of the hours each
year. This is adequate in most respects except that
1. Transformers operate higher on their saturation curve, producing
more harmonic currents (and losses), contributing more to the har-
monic distortion on the feeder, which can be particularly trouble-
some at low loads.
2. Customers may experience more frequent replacement of incandes-
cent lamps.
3. The higher voltage creates increased power demand, which may be
undesirable at times and may translate into reduced energy effi-
ciency (excessively low voltages will also yield inefficiencies).
The purpose of the line drop compensator is to level out the voltage
profile so that it provides the necessary voltage boost at peak load yet
keeps the voltage closer to nominal at lower loads. This is illustrated
in Fig. 7.8. To simplify the discussion, we’ve assumed there is no LTC
in the substation and the only regulator of concern is a feeder regula-
tor at the substation. In Fig. 7.8a, no compensation is used and the
voltage setting is 5 percent high, or 126 V on 120-V systems. Since
there is some bandwidth on the control, the voltage may actually go
higher than this. In Fig. 7.8b, the voltage setting is 120 V (100 per-
cent) with the line drop compensator set some distance out on the
feeder as shown. At peak load the voltage at the regulator rises to 105
percent, which is necessary to keep the end of the feeder at the proper
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
303
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

voltage. However, at low load, the feeder voltage profile is closer to
100 percent voltage.
There are numerous practices for determining line drop compensator
settings. Manufacturers provide computer programs for computing the
settings given the current transformer (CT) ratings and potential
transformer (PT) ratios. These vary with regulator sizes and must be
specifically known before the proper setting can be computed. Of
course, this also requires the user to model the feeders on a computer
program, for which the data may not be readily available.
Manufacturers’ guide books also have simple formulas and rule-of-
thumb procedures for determining settings.
The line drop compensator settings are called R and X for the resis-
tive and reactive components of the compensator. However, the units
304
Chapter Seven
(a) No Line Drop Compensation
(b) With Line Drop Compensation Set to Here
95%
100%
105%
95%
100%
105%
Voltage Profile
at Peak Load
Voltage Profile
at Low Load
Voltage Profile
at Peak Load
Voltage Profile
at Low Load
Figure 7.8
The effect of line drop compensation on the voltage profile.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

are volts on a 120-V base instead of ohms. To convert from actual line
impedance in ohms to the R and X settings, the basic formula is
(R  jX) setting  (R  jX) ohms

where the CT is specified by the line current rating and the PT ratio is
the nominal line-to-neutral voltage divided by 120 V.
These R and X values are used directly for wye-connected regulators.
For delta-connected regulators, these values must be modified to
account for the 30° phase shift in the voltage with respect to the line
current. For a leading delta connection, multiply by 1 30°; for a lag-
ging delta, multiply by 1 30°.
Some utilities have developed average standard settings that they
have found to be effective. Many determine the R and X settings exper-
imentally by sending a line technician to the low-voltage point on the
feeder while another adjusts the R and X settings. Ideally, this should
be done at the peak load so that a voltage setting and line drop setting
may be found that are successful in meeting this condition. It will, in
all likelihood, meet the lower load conditions satisfactorily, although
switched capacitor banks downline from the regulator may fool the con-
trol when they switch to a different state. Therefore, the voltage profile
should be monitored at one or two key locations for a few days to make
certain the setting is adequate.
Obviously, this process takes time, and it is often not convenient to
send a crew to check a regulator setting when the peak load occurs.
Often, at this time, the crews will be busy with more urgent matters such
as changing out overloaded transformers to get customers back in ser-
vice. There is a definite benefit to the power quality if the regulator is set
properly, so some effort should be made. Fortunately, manufacturers are
now supplying controls with telecommunications capability so that the
settings can be adjusted more conveniently from a control center.
Many manufacturers also offer sophisticated controls with a choice
of load-following algorithms. In the case of power quality complaints
with the voltage going out of band or too many tap changes, consult the
user’s manual and experiment with other algorithms to achieve a
smoother regulation.
7.3.2
Regulators in series
In sparsely populated areas it is not uncommon to find two or more
regulator banks in series on extremely long lines feeding remote loads.
Two notable applications are service to irrigation and mining loads
CT rating

PT ratio
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
305
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

where lines extend for miles with only an occasional load. These appli-
cations require special considerations to avoid power quality problems.
One important consideration for coordinating the regulators in series
is properly setting the initial time delay. The regulator nearest the sub-
station is set with the shortest time delay, typically 15 or 30 s.
Regulators further downline are set with a time delay of 15 s longer.
This minimizes tap changing on the downline regulators, keeping the
voltage variations to a minimum and extending contact life.
Perhaps, the greatest power quality problem in this situation is load
rejection. The sudden loss of load, which can happen after a fault, will
result in greatly excessive voltages because the regulator boosting will be
cumulative (see Fig. 7.9). Overvoltages of 20 percent or more can occur.
Transformer saturation and the remaining load will help hold the voltage
down, but it will still exceed normal limits by a considerable margin.
To minimize damage to loads, regulators employ a “rapid runback” con-
trol scheme that bypasses the normal time delay and runs the regulators
back down as quickly as possible. This is typically 2 to 4 s per tap change.
7.4
Capacitors for Voltage Regulation
Capacitors may be used for voltage regulation on the power system in
either the shunt or series configuration (Fig. 7.10). We will discuss each
class of application separately.
306
Chapter Seven
95%
100%
105%
Voltage Profile
Prior to Load Rejection
Voltage Profile
After Load Rejection
Figure 7.9
Illustration of overvoltage resulting from load rejection on regulators in
series.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

7.4.1
Shunt capacitors
As shown in Fig. 7.10a, the presence of a shunt capacitor at the end of
a feeder results in a gradual change in voltage along the feeder. Ideally,
the percent voltage rise at the capacitor
%V 
would be zero at no load and rise to maximum at full load. However,
with shunt capacitors, percent voltage rise is essentially independent
of load. Therefore, automatic switching is often employed in order to
deliver the desired regulation at high loads, but prevent excessive volt-
age at low loads. Switching may result in transient overvoltages inside
customer facilities, as described in Chap. 4.
Application of shunt capacitors may also result in a variety of har-
monic problems (see Chaps. 5 and 6).
7.4.2
Series capacitors
Unlike the shunt capacitor, a capacitor connected in series with the
feeder results in a voltage rise at the end of the feeder that varies
directly with load current. Voltage rise is zero at no load and maximum
at full load. Thus, series capacitors do not need to be switched in
response to changes in load. Moreover, a series capacitor will require
far smaller kV and kvar ratings than a shunt capacitor delivering
equivalent regulation.
But series capacitors have several disadvantages. Firstly, they can-
not provide reactive compensation for feeder loads and do not signifi-
100 (Vwith cap  Vno cap)

Vwith cap
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
307
Load
Load
Rise due to capacitor
Rise due to capacitor
Resultant
Drop due to load
Drop due to load
Resultant
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.10
Feeder voltage rise due to shunt (a) and series (b) capacitors.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

cantly reduce system losses. Series capacitors can only release addi-
tional system capacity if it is limited by excessive feeder voltage drop.
Shunt capacitors, on the other hand, are effective when system capac-
ity is limited by high feeder current as well.
Secondly, series capacitors cannot tolerate fault current. This would
result in a catastrophic overvoltage and must be prevented by bypass-
ing the capacitor through an automatic switch. An arrester must also
be connected across the capacitor to divert current until the switch
closes.
There are several other concerns that must be evaluated in a series
capacitor application. These include resonance and/or hunting with
synchronous and induction motors, and ferroresonance with trans-
formers. Because of these concerns, the application of series capacitors
on distribution systems is very limited. One area where they have
proved to be advantageous is where feeder reactance must be mini-
mized, e.g., to reduce flicker.
7.5
End-User Capacitor Application
The reasons that an end user might decide to apply power factor cor-
rection capacitors are to
■Reduce electric utility bill
■Reduce I2R losses and, therefore, heating in lines and transformers
■Increase the voltage at the load, increasing production and/or the
efficiency of the operation
■Reduce current in the lines and transformers, allowing additional
load to be served without building new circuits
The primary motivation is generally economics to eliminate utility
power factor penalties, but there are technical benefits related to power
quality as well.
There can be power quality problems as a result of adding capacitors.
The most common are harmonics problems. While power factor correc-
tion capacitors are not harmonic sources, they can interact with the
system to accentuate the harmonics that are already there (see Chaps.
5 and 6). There are also switching transient side effects such as mag-
nification of utility capacitor-switching transients (see Chap. 4).
7.5.1
Location for power factor correction
capacitors
The benefits realized by installing power factor correction capacitors
include the reduction of reactive power flow on the system. Therefore,
308
Chapter Seven
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

for best results, power factor correction should be located as close to the
load as possible. However, this may not be the most economical solution
or even the best engineering solution, due to the interaction of har-
monics and capacitors.
Often, capacitors will be installed with large induction motors (C3 in
Fig. 7.11). This allows the capacitor and motor to be switched as a unit.
Large plants with extensive distribution systems often install capaci-
tors at the primary voltage bus (C1) when utility billing encourages
power factor correction. Many times, however, power factor correction
and harmonic distortion reduction must be accomplished with the
same capacitors. Location of larger harmonic filters on the main distri-
bution bus (C2) provides the required compensation and a low-imped-
ance path for harmonic currents to flow, keeping the harmonic currents
off the utility system.
One disadvantage of placing capacitors only at the utilization or
main distribution bus is that there is no reduction of current and line
losses within the plant. Loss and current reduction are achieved when
the capacitors (C4) are distributed throughout the system. Some indus-
trial end users install capacitors at the motor control centers, which is
often more economical than putting the capacitors on each motor. The
capacitors’ controls can be tied in with the motor controls so that the
capacitors are switched when needed.
Another disadvantage is related to harmonic performance. The main
distribution bus often has a high X/R ratio, and if the capacitor instal-
lation results in harmonic resonance, very high harmonic voltages and
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
309
INCOMING SUPPLY
C1
UTILIZATION OR DISTRIBUTION BUS
DISTRIBUTED BUS
C3
C4
M
C2
Figure 7.11
Location of power factor correction.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

currents can result. This is the most common cause of damage from
harmonics in industrial plants. If there is sufficient resistance in the
cables to the loads, a distributed capacitor application may have some
natural suppression of harmonic resonance. On the other hand, the res-
onance may be more convenient to alleviate when the offending capac-
itors are in one location. Thus, the optimal design for capacitor
compensation is often a compromise between conflicting objectives.
7.5.2
Voltage rise
The voltage rise from placing capacitors on an inductive circuit is a
two-edged sword from the power quality standpoint. If the voltage is
low, then the capacitors provide an increase to bring the voltage back
into tolerable limits. However, if the capacitors are left energized when
the load is turned off, the voltage can rise too high, resulting in a sus-
tained overvoltage.
The voltage rise by the end user from the installation of capacitors is
approximated from
%V 
where %V  percent voltage rise
kvarcap  capacitor bank rating
kVAtx  step-down transformer rating
Ztx  step-down transformer impedance, %
This formula assumes that the transformer is the bulk of the total
impedance of the power system up to the point at which the capacitor
is applied.
As mentioned, one power quality problem that arises is that the volt-
age rises too high when the capacitors remain energized at low load lev-
els. One common symptom of this is loud humming in the supply
transformer and, in some cases, overheating due to overexcitation of
the core. Another symptom is the loss of excessive numbers of incan-
descant light bulbs coincident with the installation of a capacitor bank.
Thus, this formula should be applied to investigate whether it is feasi-
ble to leave the capacitors energized. If not, some control strategy must
be devised to switch the capacitors off at light loads.
7.5.3
Reduction in power system losses
The reduction in power system losses is estimated from
% lossreduction  1001 

2
pforiginal

pfcorrected
kvarcap  Ztx (%)

kVAtx
310
Chapter Seven
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

% power loss ∝100

2
where % lossreduction  percent reduction in losses
pforiginal  original power factor (pu)
pfcorrected  corrected power factor (pu)
This formula basically applies to a single capacitor on a radial feed.
However, it is also approximately correct if the capacitors are well dis-
tributed throughout the plant so that each major branch circuit sees
approximately the same percentage loss improvement.
Keep in mind that this formula gives the percent reduction possible
over the present losses upline from the capacitors. There is no reduc-
tion in losses in the lines and transformers between the capacitor and
the load.
7.5.4
Reduction in line current
The percent line current reduction can be approximated from
%I  1001 

where        %I  percent current reduction
cos before  power factor angle before correction
cos after  power factor angle after correction
Again, this applies only to currents upline from the capacitor.
7.5.5
Displacement power factor versus
true power factor
The traditional concepts of selecting power factor correction are based
on the assumption that loads on the system have linear voltage-current
characteristics and that harmonic distortion can be ignored. With these
assumptions, the power factor is equal to the displacement power fac-
tor (DPF). The DPF is calculated using the traditional power factor tri-
angle method (Fig. 7.12) and is often written as
cos before

cos after
pforiginal

pfcorrected
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
311
(apparent power)
kVA
kW (active power)
kvar
(reactive
power)

Figure 7.12
Displacement power
factor triangle.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

DPF 
 cos 
where kW and kVA are the fundamental frequency quantities only.
Harmonic distortion in the voltage and current caused by nonlinear
loads on the system changes the way the power factor must be calcu-
lated. The true power factor (TPF) is defined as the ratio of real power
to the total voltamperes in the circuit:
TPF 

As before, the power factor is defined as the ratio of kW to kVA, but in
this case, the kVA includes harmonic distortion voltamperes. The total
kVA (apparent power) is determined by multiplying the true rms volt-
age by the true rms current. It can be significantly higher than the fun-
damental frequency kVA. The active power P is generally increased
only marginally by the distortion.
The TPF is the true measure of the efficiency with which the real
power is being used. In the trivial case of no distortion, it defaults to the
DPF. Capacitors basically compensate only for the fundamental fre-
quency reactive power (vars) and cannot completely correct the true
power factor to unity when there are harmonics present. In fact, capac-
itors can make the TPF worse by creating resonance conditions which
magnify the harmonic distortion. On typical power systems, the Irms
term in the given TPF equation is generally the one most affected by
harmonic distortion, although the Vrms term may also be increased.
Assuming the voltage THD is zero, the maximum to which you can cor-
rect the TPF can be approximated by
TPF ≈
where THD is in pu.
The DPF is still very important to most industrial customers because
utility billing for power factor penalties is generally based on it. Most
revenue metering schemes currently account only for the DPF.
However, this could change because modern electronic meters certainly
have the capability to compute the TPF, which will be considerably
lower for some types of industrial loads.
7.5.6
Selecting the amount of capacitance
As reference for those wishing to apply capacitors to correct the power
factor, the kvar of capacitance required to correct a load to a desired
power factor is given by
1

1  THD2
current
P

Vrms Irms
kW

kVA
kW

kVA
312
Chapter Seven
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

kvar  kW (tan orig  tan new)
kW   1
    1

where kvar  required compensation in kvar
kW  real power in kW
orig  original power factor phase angle
new  desired power factor phase angle
PForig  original power factor
PFnew  desired power factor
Table 7.1 summarizes the equation in tabular form.
After selecting estimated capacitor sizes, two power quality checks
should be done:
1. Determine the no-load voltage rise to make sure that the voltage
will not rise above 110 percent when the load is minimum. If it does,
you will have to switch some of the capacitors off or apply fewer
capacitors.
2. Determine the impact of the capacitors on harmonics (see Chap. 5).
If harmonics prove to be a problem, typical options are
1. Change the amount of capacitors, if possible. Avoid certain switch-
ing combinations. This is generally the least-cost solution.
2. Convert some of the capacitors to one or more filters, usually placed
at the main bus.
3. Employ an adaptive control to monitor the harmonic distortion and
switch the capacitors to avoid resonance. This might be appropriate
for large industrial loads where there are numerous switched capac-
itors coming on and off line randomly.
7.6
Regulating Utility Voltage with
Distributed Resources
It is becoming more popular for utility distribution planners to consider
distributed generation (DG) and storage devices to defer investments
in substations and transmission lines until the load has grown to a suf-
ficient size to warrant the larger investment. This concept is particu-
larly useful when there are a relatively few number of hours each year
when the load approaches the system capacity limits. The movement
toward utility deregulation in recent years has created renewed inter-
est in distributed resources, and many of the issues related to power
quality are addressed in Chap. 9. Here, we will restrict our discussion
1

PF2
new
1

PF2
orig
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
313
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

TABLE 7.1
kW Multiplier to Determine kvar Requirement
Corrected power factor
Original PF
0.80
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
0.50
0.982
1.034
1.086
1.139
1.192
1.248
1.306
1.369
1.440
1.529
1.732
0.52
0.893
0.945
0.997
1.049
1.103
1.158
1.217
1.280
1.351
1.440
1.643
0.54
0.809
0.861
0.913
0.965
1.019
1.074
1.133
1.196
1.267
1.356
1.559
0.56
0.729
0.781
0.834
0.886
0.940
0.995
1.053
1.116
1.188
1.276
1.479
0.58
0.655
0.707
0.759
0.811
0.865
0.920
0.979
1.042
1.113
1.201
1.405
0.60
0.583
0.635
0.687
0.740
0.794
0.849
0.907
0.970
1.042
1.130
1.333
0.62
0.515
0.567
0.620
0.672
0.726
0.781
0.839
0.903
0.974
1.062
1.265
0.64
0.451
0.503
0.555
0.607
0.661
0.716
0.775
0.838
0.909
0.998
1.201
0.66
0.388
0.440
0.492
0.545
0.599
0.654
0.712
0.775
0.847
0.935
1.138
0.68
0.328
0.380
0.432
0.485
0.539
0.594
0.652
0.715
0.787
0.875
1.078
0.70
0.270
0.322
0.374
0.427
0.480
0.536
0.594
0.657
0.729
0.817
1.020
0.72
0.214
0.266
0.318
0.370
0.424
0.480
0.538
0.601
0.672
0.761
0.964
0.74
0.159
0.211
0.263
0.316
0.369
0.425
0.483
0.546
0.617
0.706
0.909
0.76
0.105
0.157
0.209
0.262
0.315
0.371
0.429
0.492
0.563
0.652
0.855
0.78
0.052
0.104
0.156
0.209
0.263
0.318
0.376
0.439
0.511
0.599
0.802
0.80
0.000
0.052
0.104
0.157
0.210
0.266
0.324
0.387
0.458
0.547
0.750
0.82
0.000
0.052
0.105
0.158
0.214
0.272
0.335
0.406
0.495
0.698
0.84
0.000
0.053
0.106
0.162
0.220
0.283
0.354
0.443
0.646
0.86
0.000
0.054
0.109
0.167
0.230
0.302
0.390
0.593
0.88
0.000
0.055
0.114
0.177
0.248
0.337
0.540
0.90
0.000
0.058
0.121
0.193
0.281
0.484
0.92
0.000
0.063
0.134
0.223
0.426
0.94
0.000
0.071
0.160
0.363
0.96
0.000
0.089
0.292
0.98
0.000
0.203
1.00
0.000
314
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

to the potential of using distributed generators for distribution feeder
voltage regulation.
Most of the utility-owned installations have been located in utility
distribution substations. This offers load relief for the substation and
transmission facilities, but contributes little else to the quality of power
for the distribution feeder. Now, many distribution engineers are con-
sidering the benefits of moving the devices out onto the feeder to gain
additional system capacity, loss reduction, improved reliability, and
voltage regulation. These generators will often be owned by end users,
but could be contracted to operate for utility system benefits as well.
While this option may be too expensive to consider for voltage regula-
tion alone, it is a useful side effect of dispersed sources justified on the
basis of deferment of capital expansion.
While few utility distribution planners will rely on customer-owned
generation for base capacity, it is more palatable to employ them to
help cover contingencies. One example is illustrated in Fig. 7.13.
Utilities usually have sectionalizing switches installed so that portions
of a distribution feeder can be served from different feeders or substa-
tions during emergencies. If the fault occurs at the time of peak load, it
may be impossible to pick up any more load from other feeders in the
normal manner simply by closing a switch. However, a generator
located near the switch tie point can potentially provide enough power
to support the additional load at a satisfactory voltage. If the generator
is of sufficient size, it could be employed to help regulate the voltage.
One advantage of using a generator to regulate the voltage is that its
controls respond much faster and more smoothly than discrete tap-
changing devices like regulators and LTCs. While this potential exists,
most utility distribution protection engineers are reluctant to allow
this type of operation without careful study and costly control equip-
ment. The issue is that operating with automative voltage regulation
makes the system more susceptible to sustaining an inadvertent
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
315
Tie Switch
Generator
FAULT
Figure 7.13
Using a generator to support restoration of service to
the unfaulted portion of a feeder.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

island. Therefore, some means of direct transfer trip is generally
required to ensure that the generator disconnects from the system
when certain utility breakers operate.
A more normal connection of DG is to use power and power factor
control. This minimizes the risk of islanding. Although the DG no
longer attempts to regulate the voltage, it is still useful for voltage reg-
ulation purposes during constrained loading conditions by displacing
some active and reactive power. Alternatively, customer-owned DG
may be exploited simply by operating off-grid and supporting part or all
of the customer’s load off-line. This avoids interconnection issues and
provides some assistance to voltage regulation by reducing the load.
The controls of distributed sources must be carefully coordinated
with existing line regulators and substation LTCs. Reverse power flow
can sometimes fool voltage regulators into moving the tap changer in
the wrong direction. Also, it is possible for the generator to cause regu-
lators to change taps constantly, causing early failure of the tap-chang-
ing mechanism. Fortunately, some regulator manufacturers have
anticipated these problems and now provide sophisticated microcom-
puter-based regulator controls that are able to compensate.
To exploit dispersed sources for voltage regulation, one is limited in
options to the types of devices with steady, controllable outputs such as
reciprocating engines, combustion turbines, fuel cells, and battery stor-
age. Randomly varying sources such as wind turbines and photo-
voltaics are unsatisfactory for this role and often must be placed on a
relatively stiff part of the system or have special regulation to avoid
voltage regulation difficulties. DG used for voltage regulation must
also be large enough to accomplish the task.
Not all technologies are suitable for regulating voltage. They must be
capable of producing a controlled amount of reactive power.
Manufacturers of devices requiring inverters for interconnection some-
times program the inverter controls to operate only at unity power factor
while grid-connected. Simple induction generators consume reactive
power like an induction motor, which can cause low voltage.
7.7
Flicker*
Although voltage flicker is not technically a long-term voltage varia-
tion, it is included in this chapter because the root cause of problems is
the same: The system is too weak to support the load. Also, some of the
solutions are the same as for the slow-changing voltage regulation
problems. The voltage variations resulting from flicker are often within
the normal service voltage range, but the changes are sufficiently rapid
to be irritating to certain end users.
316
Chapter Seven
*This section was contributed by Jeff W. Smith.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Flicker is a relatively old subject that has gained considerable
attention recently due to the increased awareness of issues concern-
ing power quality. Power engineers first dealt with flicker in the
1880s when the decision of using ac over dc was of concern.2 Low-fre-
quency ac voltage resulted in a “flickering” of the lights. To avoid this
problem, a higher 60-Hz frequency was chosen as the standard in
North America.
The term flicker is sometimes considered synonymous with voltage
fluctuations, voltage flicker, light flicker, or lamp flicker. The phenom-
enon being referred to can be defined as a fluctuation in system voltage
that can result in observable changes (flickering) in light output.
Because flicker is mostly a problem when the human eye observes it, it
is considered to be a problem of perception.
In the early 1900s, many studies were done on humans to deter-
mine observable and objectionable levels of flicker. Many curves, such
as the one shown in Fig. 7.14, were developed by various companies
to determine the severity of flicker. The flicker curve shown in Fig.
7.14 was developed by C. P. Xenis and W. Perine in 1937 and was
based upon data obtained from 21 groups of observers. In order to
account for the nature of flicker, the observers were exposed to vari-
ous waveshape voltage variations, levels of illumination, and types of
lighting.3
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
317
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0
Frequency of Flicker in Seconds
Voltage Change (in Volts) on 120-V System
Thr
es
ho
ld of Perception
Thr
esh
old
of O
bject
ion
Figure 7.14
General flicker curve.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Flicker can be separated into two types: cyclic and noncyclic. Cyclic
flicker is a result of periodic voltage fluctuations on the system, while
noncyclic is a result of occasional voltage fluctuations.
An example of sinusoidal-cyclic flicker is shown in Fig. 7.15. This
type of flicker is simply amplitude modulation where the main signal
(60 Hz for North America) is the carrier signal and flicker is the modu-
lating signal. Flicker signals are usually specified as a percentage of
the normal operating voltage. By using a percentage, the flicker signal
is independent of peak, peak-to-peak, rms, line-to-neutral, etc.
Typically, percent voltage modulation is expressed by
Percent voltage modulation 
 100%
where Vmax  maximum value of modulated signal
Vmin  minimum value of modulated signal
V0  average value of normal operating voltage
The usual method for expressing flicker is similar to that of percent
voltage modulation. It is usually expressed as a percent of the total
change in voltage with respect to the average voltage (V/V) over a cer-
tain period of time.
Vmax  Vmin

V0
318
Chapter Seven
–200
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
200
0.000
0.058
0.117
0.175
0.233
0.292
0.350
0.408
0.467
0.525
0.583
0.642
0.700
0.758
0.817
0.875
0.933
Time (s)
Voltage (V)
Figure 7.15
Example flicker waveform.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The frequency content of flicker is extremely important in determin-
ing whether or not flicker levels are observable (or objectionable).
Describing the frequency content of the flicker signal in terms of mod-
ulation would mean that the flicker frequency is essentially the fre-
quency of the modulating signal. The typical frequency range of
observable flicker is from 0.5 to 30.0 Hz, with observable magnitudes
starting at less than 1.0 percent.
As shown in Fig. 7.14, the human eye is more sensitive to luminance
fluctuations in the 5- to 10-Hz range. As the frequency of flicker
increases or decreases away from this range, the human eye generally
becomes more tolerable of fluctuations.
One issue that was not considered in the development of the tradi-
tional flicker curve is that of multiple flicker signals. Generally, most
flicker-producing loads contain multiple flicker signals (of varying
magnitudes and frequencies), thus making it very difficult to accu-
rately quantify flicker using flicker curves.
7.7.1
Sources of flicker
Typically, flicker occurs on systems that are weak relative to the
amount of power required by the load, resulting in a low short-circuit
ratio. This, in combination with considerable variations in current over
a short period of time, results in flicker. As the load increases, the cur-
rent in the line increases, thus increasing the voltage drop across the
line. This phenomenon results in a sudden reduction in bus voltage.
Depending upon the change in magnitude of voltage and frequency of
occurrence, this could result in observable amounts of flicker. If a light-
ing load were connected to the system in relatively close proximity to
the fluctuating load, observers could see this as a dimming of the lights.
A common situation, which could result in flicker, would be a large
industrial plant located at the end of a weak distribution feeder.
Whether the resulting voltage fluctuations cause observable or objec-
tionable flicker is dependent upon the following parameters:
■Size (VA) of potential flicker-producing source
■System impedance (stiffness of utility)
■Frequency of resulting voltage fluctuations
A common load that can often cause flicker is an electric arc furnace
(EAF). EAFs are nonlinear, time-varying loads that often cause large
voltage fluctuations and harmonic distortion. Most of the large current
fluctuations occur at the beginning of the melting cycle. During this
period, pieces of scrap steel can actually bridge the gap between the elec-
trodes, resulting in a highly reactive short circuit on the secondary side
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
319
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

of the furnace transformer. This meltdown period can generally result in
flicker in the 1.0- to 10.0-Hz range. Once the melting cycle is over and the
refining period is reached, stable arcs can usually be held on the elec-
trodes resulting in a steady, three-phase load with high power factor.4
Large induction machines undergoing start-up or widely varying
load torque changes are also known to produce voltage fluctuations on
systems. As a motor is started up, most of the power drawn by the
motor is reactive (see Fig. 7.16). This results in a large voltage drop
across distribution lines. The most severe case would be when a motor
is started across the line. This type of start-up can result in current
drawn by the motor up to multiples of the full load current.
An example illustrating the impact motor starting and torque changes
can have on system voltage is shown in Fig. 7.17. In this case, a large
industrial plant is located at the end of a weak distribution feeder. Within
the plant are four relatively large induction machines that are frequently
restarted and undergo relatively large load torque variations.5
Although starting large induction machines across the line is gener-
ally not a recommended practice, it does occur. To reduce flicker, large
motors are brought up to speed using various soft-start techniques
such as reduced-voltage starters or variable-speed drives.
In certain circumstances, superimposed interharmonics in the sup-
ply voltage can lead to oscillating luminous flux and cause flicker.
Voltage interharmonics are components in the harmonic spectrum that
are noninteger multiples of the fundamental frequency. This phenom-
enon can be observed with incandescent lamps as well as with fluores-
cent lamps. Sources of interharmonics include static frequency
converters, cycloconverters, subsynchronous converter cascades,
induction furnaces, and arc furnaces.6
320
Chapter Seven
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Slip
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Active Power
Reactive Power
Q
P
Figure 7.16
Active and reactive power during induction machine 
start-up.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

7.7.2
Mitigation techniques
Many options are available to alleviate flicker problems. Mitigation
alternatives include static capacitors, power electronic-based switch-
ing devices, and increasing system capacity. The particular method
chosen is based upon many factors such as the type of load causing the
flicker, the capacity of the system supplying the load, and cost of miti-
gation technique.
Flicker is usually the result of a varying load that is large relative to
the system short-circuit capacity. One obvious way to remove flicker
from the system would be to increase the system capacity sufficiently
to decrease the relative impact of the flicker-producing load. Upgrading
the system could include any of the following: reconductoring, replac-
ing existing transformers with higher kVA ratings, or increasing the
operating voltage.
Motor modifications are also an available option to reduce the
amount of flicker produced during motor starting and load varia-
tions. The motor can be rewound (changing the motor class) such
that the speed-torque curves are modified. Unfortunately, in some
cases this could result in a lower running efficiency. Flywheel energy
systems can also reduce the amount of current drawn by motors by
delivering the mechanical energy required to compensate for load
torque variations.
Recently, series reactors have been found to reduce the amount of
flicker experienced on a system caused by EAFs. Series reactors help sta-
bilize the arc, thus reducing the current variations during the beginning
of melting periods. By adding the series reactor, the sudden increase in
current is reduced due the increase in circuit reactance. Series reactors
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
321
Motor Starting and Load Torque Variations
40
60
80
100
120
140
299000
302000
305000
308000
311000
314000
Time (ms)
Figure 7.17
Voltage fluctuations caused by induction machine operation.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

also have the benefit of reducing the supply-side harmonic levels.7 The
design of the reactor must be coordinated with power requirements.
Series capacitors can also be used to reduce the effect of flicker on an
existing system. In general, series capacitors are placed in series with
the transmission line supplying the load. The benefit of series capacitors
is that the reaction time for the correction to load fluctuations is instan-
taneous in nature. The downside to series capacitors is that compensa-
tion is only available beyond the capacitor. Bus voltages between the
supply and the capacitor are uncompensated. Also, series capacitors
have operational difficulties that require careful engineering.
Fixed shunt-connected capacitor banks are used for long-term volt-
age support or power factor correction. A misconception is that shunt
capacitors can be used to reduce flicker. The starting voltage sag is
reduced, but the percent change in voltage (V/V) is not reduced, and
in some cases can actually be increased.
A rather inexpensive method for reducing the flicker effects of motor
starting would be to simply install a step-starter for the motor, which
would reduce the amount of starting current during motor start-up.
With the advances in solid-state technology, the size, weight, and cost
of adjustable-speed drives have decreased, thus allowing the use of
such devices to be more feasible in reducing the flicker effects caused
by flicker-producing loads.
Static var compensators (SVCs) are very flexible and have many
roles in power systems. SVCs can be used for power factor correction,
flicker reduction, and steady-state voltage control, and also have the
benefit of being able to filter out undesirable frequencies from the sys-
tem. SVCs typically consist of a TCR in parallel with fixed capacitors
(Fig. 7.18). The fixed capacitors are usually connected in ungrounded
wye with a series inductor to implement a filter. The reactive power
that the inductor delivers in the filter is small relative to the rating of
the filter (approximately 1 to 2 percent). There are often multiple filter
stages tuned to different harmonics. The controls in the TCR allow con-
tinuous variations in the amount of reactive power delivered to the sys-
tem, thus increasing the reactive power during heavy loading periods
and reducing the reactive power during light loading.
SVCs can be very effective in controlling voltage fluctuations at
rapidly varying loads. Unfortunately, the price for such flexibility is
high. Nevertheless, they are often the only cost-effective solution for
many loads located in remote areas where the power system is weak.
Much of the cost is in the power electronics on the TCR. Sometimes this
can be reduced by using a number of capacitor steps. The TCR then
need only be large enough to cover the reactive power gap between the
capacitor stages.
322
Chapter Seven
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Thyristor-switched capacitors (TSCs) can also be used to supply reac-
tive power to the power system in a very short amount of time, thus
being helpful in reducing the effects of quick load fluctuations. TSCs
usually consist of two to five shunt capacitor banks connected in series
with diodes and thyristors connected back to back. The capacitor sizes
are usually equal to each other or are set at multiples of each other,
allowing for smoother transitions and increased flexibility in reactive
power control. Switching the capacitors in or out of the system in dis-
crete steps controls the amount of reactive power delivered to the sys-
tem by the TSC. This action is unlike that of the SVC, where the
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
323
Fixed Capacitors and Tuning Reactors
TCR
Fixed Capacitors (Single-Phase)
Tuning
Reactors
5th
Harmonic
7th
Harmonic
11th
Harmonic
13th
Harmonic
High-Pass
Filter
Figure 7.18
Typical SVC configuration.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

capacitors are static and the reactors are used to control the reactive
power. An example diagram of a TSC is shown in Fig. 7.19.
The control of the TSC is usually based on line voltage magnitude,
line current magnitude, or reactive power flow in the line. The control
circuits can be used for all three phases or each phase separately. The
individual phase control offers improved compensation when unbal-
anced loads are producing flicker.
7.7.3
Quantifying flicker
Flicker has been a power quality problem even before the term power
quality was established. However, it has taken many years to develop
an adequate means of quantifying flicker levels. Chapter 11 provides
an in-depth look at power quality monitoring, with a section that
describes modern techniques for measuring and quantifying flicker.
7.8
References
1. L. Morgan, S. Ihara, “Distribution Feeder Modification to Service Both Sensitive
Loads and Large Drives,” 1991 IEEE PES Transmission and Distribution Conference
Record, Dallas, September 1991, pp. 686–690.
2. E. L. Owen, “Power Disturbance and Power Quality—Light Flicker Voltage
Requirements,” Conference Record, IEEE IAS Annual Meeting, Denver, October
1994, pp. 2303–2309.
3. C. P. Xenis, W. Perine, “Slide Rule Yields Lamp Flicker Data.” Electrical World, Oct.
23, 1937, p. 53.
4. S. B. Griscom, “Lamp Flicker on Power Systems,” Chap. 22, Electrical Transmission
and Distribution Reference Book, 4th ed., Westinghouse Elec. Corp., East Pittsburgh,
Pa., 1950.
5. S. M. Halpin, J. W. Smith, C. A. Litton, “Designing Industrial Systems with a Weak
Utility Supply,” IEEE Industry Applications Magazine, March/April 2001, pp. 63–70.
6. Interharmonics in Power Systems,
IEEE Interharmonic Task Force, Cigre
36.05/CIRED 2 CC02, Voltage Quality Working Group.
7. S. R. Mendis, M. T. Bishop, T. R. Day, D. M. Boyd, “Evaluation of Supplementary
Series Reactors to Optimize Electric Arc Furnace Operations,” Conference Record,
IEEE IAS Annual Meeting, Orlando, Fla., October 1995, pp. 2154–2161.
324
Chapter Seven
Figure 7.19
Typical TSC configuration.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

7.9
Bibliography
IEEE Standard 141-1993: Recommended Practice for Power Distribution in Industrial
Plants, IEEE, 1993.
IEEE Standard 519-1992: Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic
Control in Electrical Power Systems, IEEE, 1993.
IEC 61000-4-15, Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC). Part 4: Testing and Measuring
Techniques. Section 15: Flickermeter—Functional and Design Specifications.
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
325
Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Long-Duration Voltage Variations
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

327
Power Quality Benchmarking
Foreword
EPRI has been studying power quality (PQ) problems and
solutions for over 15 years. This chapter presents many new and
innovative approaches to PQ monitoring, analysis, and planning that
have been developed since the First Edition of this book. The authors
have been intimately involved in this research. Tremendous progress
has been made and readers can gain a better understanding of the
state-of-the-art of this research, which continues.
Power quality benchmarking is an important aspect in the overall
structure of a power quality program. The benchmarking process begins
with defining the metrics to be used for benchmarking and evaluating
service quality. The EPRI Reliability Benchmarking Methodology
project (EPRI Reliability Benchmarking Methodology, EPRI TR-
107938, EPRI, Palo Alto, California) defined a set of PQ indices that
serve as metrics for quantifying quality of service. These indices are
calculated from data measured on the system by specialized
instrumentation. Many utilities around the world have implemented
permanent PQ monitoring systems for benchmarking power quality.
However, there are still considerably large gaps in coverage of the power
system with PQ monitors. As part of the EPRI Reliability
Benchmarking Methodology project, investigators explored the idea of
estimating the voltages at locations without monitors given the data at
only one monitor or a few monitors. This resulted in the development of
the concept of the EPRI Power Quality State Estimator (PQSE), which
uses feeder models and recorded data to estimate what would have been
recorded on the customer side of the service transformer.
This chapter will serve as a useful reference for identifying suitable
indices for benchmarking the quality of service and analytical methods
for extending the capabilities of PQ monitoring instrumentation. We
Chapter8
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality

applaud the authors for presenting this information in an easily
understandable manner. In the overall context of a PQ program,
benchmarking is an essential ingredient.
Ashok Sundaram, EPRI
Arshad Mansoor, EPRI-PEAC Corporation
8.1
Introduction
Because of sensitive customer loads, there is a need to define the qual-
ity of electricity provided in a common and succinct manner that can be
evaluated by the electricity supplier as well as by consumers or equip-
ment suppliers. This chapter describes recent developments in meth-
ods for benchmarking the performance of electricity supply.
One of the basic tenets of solving power quality problems is that dis-
turbances in the electric power system are not restricted by legal
boundaries. Power suppliers, power consumers, and equipment suppli-
ers must work together to solve many problems. Before they can do
that, they must understand the electrical environment in which end-
use equipment operates. This is necessary to reduce the long-term eco-
nomic impact of inevitable power quality variations and to identify
system improvements that can mitigate power quality problems.1–3
A comprehensive set of power quality indices was defined for the
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) Reliability Benchmarking
Methodology (RBM) project1 to serve as metrics for quantifying quality
of service. The power quality indices are used to evaluate compatibility
between the voltage as delivered by the electric utility and the sensi-
tivity of the end user’s equipment. The indices were patterned after the
indices commonly used by utilities to describe reliability to reduce the
learning curve. A few of the indices have become popular, and software
has been developed to compute them from measured data and estimate
them from simulations. We will examine the definitions of some of the
indices and then look at how they might be included in contracts and
planning.
8.2
Benchmarking Process
Electric utilities throughout the world are embracing the concept of
benchmarking service quality. Utilities realize that they must under-
stand the levels of service quality provided throughout their distribu-
tion systems and determine if the levels provided are appropriate. This
is certainly becoming more prevalent as more utilities contract with
specific customers to provide a specified quality of service over some
period of time. The typical steps in the power quality benchmarking
process are
328
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

1. Select benchmarking metrics.
The EPRI RBM project defined sev-
eral performance indices for evaluating the electric service quality.4
A select group are described here in more detail.
2. Collect power quality data.
This involves the placement of power
quality monitors on the system and characterization of the perfor-
mance of the system. A variety of instruments and monitoring sys-
tems 
have 
been 
recently 
developed 
to 
assist 
with 
this
labor-intensive process (see Chap. 11).
3. Select the benchmark.
This could be based on past performance, a
standard adopted by similar utilities, or a standard established by a
professional or standards organization such as the IEEE, IEC,
ANSI, or NEMA.
4. Determine target performance levels.
These are targets that are
appropriate and economically feasible. Target levels may be limited
to specific customers or customer groups and may exceed the bench-
mark values.
The benchmarking process begins with selection of the metrics to be
used for benchmarking and evaluating service quality. The metrics
could simply be estimated from historical data such as average number
of faults per mile of line and assuming the fault resulted in a certain
number of sags and interruptions. However, electricity providers and
consumers are increasingly interested in metrics that describe the
actual performance for a given time period. The indices developed as
part of the EPRI RBM project are calculated from data measured on
the system by specialized instrumentation.
Electric utilities throughout the world are deploying power quality
monitoring infrastructures that provide the data required for accurate
benchmarking of the service quality provided to consumers. These are
permanent monitoring systems due to the time needed to obtain accu-
rate data and the importance of power quality to the end users where
these systems are being installed. For most utilities and consumers,
the most important power quality variation is the voltage sag due to
short-circuit faults. Although these events are not necessarily the most
frequent, they have a tremendous economic impact on end users. The
process of benchmarking voltage sag levels generally requires 2 to 3
years of sampling. These data can then be quantified to relate voltage
sag performance with standardized indices that are understandable by
both utilities and customers.
Finally, after the appropriate data have been acquired, the service
provider must determine what levels of quality are appropriate and
economically feasible. Increasingly, utilities are making these decisions
in conjunction with individual customers or regulatory agencies. The
Power Quality Benchmarking
329
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

economic law of diminishing returns applies to increasing the quality
of electricity as it applies to most quality assurance programs. Electric
utilities note that nearly any level of service quality can be achieved
through alternate feeders, standby generators, UPS systems, energy
storage, etc. However, at some point the costs cannot be economically
justified and must be balanced with the needs of end users and the
value of service to them.
Most utilities have been benchmarking reliability for several
decades. In the context of this book, reliability deals with sustained
interruptions. IEEE Standard 1366-1998 was established to define the
benchmarking metrics for this area of power quality.5 The metrics are
defined in terms of system average or customer average indices regard-
ing such things as the number of interruptions and the duration of
interruption (SAIDI, SAIFI, etc.). However, the reliability indices do
not capture the impact of loads tripping off-line for 70 percent voltage
sags nor the loss of efficiency and premature equipment failure due to
excessive harmonic distortion.
Interest in expanding the service quality benchmarking into areas
other than traditional reliability increased markedly in the late 1980s.
This was largely prompted by experiences with power electronic loads
that produced significant harmonic currents and were much more sensi-
tive to voltage sags than previous generations of electromechanical
loads. In 1989, the EPRI initiated the EPRI Distribution Power Quality
(DPQ) Project, RP 3098-1, to collect power quality data for distribution
systems across the United States. Monitors were placed at nearly 300
locations on 100 distribution feeders, and data were collected for 27
months. The DPQ database contains over 30 gigabytes of power quality
data and has served as the basis for standards efforts and many stud-
ies.1,6 The results were made available to EPRI member utilities in 1996.
Upon completion of the DPQ project in 1995, it became apparent that
there was no uniform way of benchmarking the performance of specific
service quality measurements against these data. In 1996, the EPRI
completed the RBM project, which provided the power quality indices
to allow service quality to be defined in a consistent manner from one
utility to another.4 The indices were patterned after the traditional reli-
ability indices with which utility engineers had already become com-
fortable. Indices were defined for
1. Short-duration rms voltage variations. These are voltage sags,
swells, and interruptions of less than 1 min.
2. Harmonic distortion.
3. Transient overvoltages. This category is largely capacitor-switching
transients, but could also include lightning-induced transients.
330
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

4. Steady-state voltage variations such as voltage regulation and
phase balance.
This chapter describes methodologies for determining target levels of
quality for various applications based on the statistical distribution of
quality indices values calculated from actual measurement data. We
will concentrate on the more popular indices for rms voltage variations
and harmonics. Readers are referred to the documents cited in the ref-
erences to this chapter for more details.
8.3
RMS Voltage Variation Indices
For many years, the only indices defined to quantify rms variation ser-
vice quality were the sustained interruption indices (SAIFI, CAIDI,
etc.). Sustained interruptions are in fact only one type of rms variation.
IEEE Standard 1159-19957 defines a sustained interruption as a reduc-
tion in the rms voltage to less than 10 percent of nominal voltage for
longer than 1 min (see Chap. 2).
Sustained interruptions are of great importance because all cus-
tomers on the faulted section are affected by such disturbances.
Indices for evaluating them have been in use informally by utilities for
many years and were recently standardized by the IEEE in IEEE
Standard 1366-1998.5 Long before, some utilities had been required to
report certain indices to regulatory agencies. The standard also
defines indices quantifying momentary interruption performance,
which quantifies another very important type of rms voltage variation.
Momentary interruptions are due to clearing of temporary faults and
the subsequent reclose operation (see Chap. 3). While they are not cap-
tured in the traditional reliability indices, they affect many end-user
classes. The rms voltage variation indices take this one step farther
and define metrics for voltage sags, which can also affect many end
users adversely.
8.3.1
Characterizing rms variation events
IEEE Standard 1159-19957 provides a common terminology that can be
used to discuss and assess rms voltage variations, defining magnitude
ranges for sags, swells, and interruptions. The standard suggests that
the terms sag, swell, and interruption be preceded by a modifier
describing the duration of the event (instantaneous, momentary, tem-
porary, or sustained). These definitions are summarized in Chap. 2.
RMS variations are classified by the magnitude and duration of the
disturbances. Therefore, before rms variation indices can be calculated,
magnitude and duration characteristics must be extracted from the
Power Quality Benchmarking
331
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

332
Chapter Eight
raw waveform data recorded for each event. Characterization is a term
used to describe the process of extracting from a measurement useful
pieces of information which describe the event so that not every detail
of the event has to be retained.
Characterization of rms variations can be very complicated. It is
structured into three levels, each of which is identified as a type of
event as follows:
1. Phase or component event
2. Measurement event
3. Aggregate event
Component event level.
Each phase of each rms variation measure-
ment may contain multiple components. Most rms variations have a
simple rectangular shape and are accurately characterized by a single
magnitude and duration. Approximately 10 percent of rms variations
are nonrectangular1 and have multiple components. Consider the rms
variation shown in Fig. 8.1. It exhibits a voltage swell followed by two
levels of voltage sag. This event was the result of clearing a temporary
single-line-to-ground fault that evolved into a double-line-to-ground
Phase A Voltage
RMS Variation
February 20, 1994 at 12:52:52 Local
Trigger
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
% Volts
% Volts
–150
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
0
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
Time (s)
Time (ms)
Duration
0.633 s
Min
0.166
Ave
75.50
Max 138.8
Ref Cycle
43760
Figure 8.1
Multicomponent, nonrectangular rms variation.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Power Quality Benchmarking
333
fault before the breaker tripped. The breaker then reclosed successfully
in about 0.2 s. Note that only about 10 cycles of the initial voltage swell
are shown in the waveform plot on the bottom. The entire event lasted
nearly 1.5 s, although the instrument reports only the duration of the
voltage swell. Other software is required to postprocess the waveform
off-line to determine the other characteristics of this event. Variations
like this are much more difficult to characterize because no single mag-
nitude-duration pair completely represents the phase measurement.
Most of the methods for characterization agree that the magnitude
reported must be the maximum deviation from nominal voltage. The dif-
ficulty lies in assigning a duration associated with the magnitude. The
method defined here is called the specified voltage method. This method
designates the duration as the period of time that the rms voltage exceeds
a specified threshold voltage level used to characterize the disturbance.
Thus, events like the one in Fig. 8.1 would be assigned different dura-
tion values depending on the specified voltage threshold of interest.
Figure 8.2 illustrates this concept for three voltage levels: 80, 50, and 10
percent. T80% is the duration of the event for an assessment of sags hav-
ing magnitudes 80 percent. Likewise, T50% and T10% are the durations
associated with sags of the corresponding voltage levels. Notice that
T80% and T50% are both 800 ms because both of the sag components of this
nonrectangular event have magnitudes well below 50 percent. T10%,
however, comprises only the duration of the second component, 200 ms.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0.000
0.167
0.333
0.500
0.667
0.833
1.000
1.167
1.333
1.500
1.667
Time (s)
% Volts
Measurement
Event #1
T10%
T50%
T80%
Figure 8.2
Illustration of specified voltage characterization of rms variation phase mea-
surements.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Measurement event level.
A power system occurrence such as a fault
can affect one, two, or all three phases of the distribution system. The
magnitude and duration of the resulting rms variation may differ sub-
stantially for different phases. A determination must be made concern-
ing how to report three-phase measurement events. For an assessment
of single-phase performance, each of the three phases are reported sep-
arately. Thus, for some faults, three different rms variations are
included in the indices. This will be inappropriate for loads that see
this as a single event.
The method defined here for characterizing measurement events is a
three-phase method. A single set of characteristics are determined for
all affected phases. For each rms variation event, the magnitude and
duration are designated as the magnitude and duration of the phase
with the greatest voltage deviation from nominal voltage.
Aggregate event level.
An aggregate event is the collection of all mea-
surements associated with a single power system occurrence into a sin-
gle set of event characteristics. For example, a single distribution system
fault might result in several measurements as the overcurrent protec-
tion system operates to clear the faults and restore service. An aggregate
event associated with this fault would summarize all the associated mea-
surements into a single set of characteristics (magnitude, duration, etc.).
While there may be many individual events, many end-user devices will
trip or misoperate on the initial event. The succeeding rms variations
have no further adverse effect on the end-user process. Thus, aggrega-
tion provides a truer assessment of service quality. RMS variation per-
formance indices are usually based on aggregate events.
A good method of aggregating measurements is to consider all events
that occur within a defined interval of the first event to be part of the
same aggregate event. One minute is a typical time interval, which cor-
responds to the minimum length of a sustained interruption. The mag-
nitude and duration of the aggregate event are determined from the
measurement event most likely to result in customer equipment failure.
This will generally be the event exhibiting the greatest voltage deviation.
8.3.2
RMS variation performance indices
The rms variation indices are designed to assess the service quality for a
specified circuit area. The indices may be scaled to systems of different
sizes. They may be applied to measurements recorded across a utility’s
entire distribution system resulting in SAIFI-like system averages, or the
indices may be applied to a single feeder or a single customer PCC.
There are many properties of rms variations that could be useful to
quantify—properties such as the frequency of occurrence, the duration of
334
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

disturbances, and the number of phases involved. Many rms variation
indices were defined in the EPRI RBM project to address these various
issues. Space does not permit a description of all of these, so we will con-
centrate on one index that has, perhaps, become the most popular. The
papers and reports included in the references contain details on others.
System average rms (variation) frequency indexVoltage (SARFIx).
SARFIx
represents the average number of specified rms variation measure-
ment events that occurred over the assessment period per customer
served, where the specified disturbances are those with a magnitude
less than x for sags or a magnitude greater than x for swells:
SARFIx 
where x  rms voltage threshold; possible values are 140, 120, 110, 90,
80, 70, 50, and 10
Ni  number of customers experiencing short-duration volt-
age deviations with magnitudes above X percent for X 
100 or below X percent for X  100 due to measurement
event i
NT  total number of customers served from section of system to
be assessed
Notice that SARFI is defined with respect to the voltage threshold x.
For example, if a utility has customers that are only susceptible to sags
below 70 percent of nominal voltage, this disturbance group can be
assessed using SARFI70. The eight defined threshold values for the
index are not arbitrary. They are chosen to coincide with the following:
140, 120, and 110.
Overvoltage segments of the ITI curve.
90, 80, and 70.
Undervoltage segments of ITI curve.
50.
Typical break point for assessing motor contactors.
10.
IEEE Standard 1159 definition of an interruption.
An increasing popular use of SARFI is to define the threshold as a
curve. For example, SARFIITIC would represent the frequency of rms
variation events outside the ITI curve voltage tolerance envelope.
Three such curve indices are commonly computed:
SARFICBEMA
SARFIITIC
SARFISEMI
∑Ni

NT
Power Quality Benchmarking
335
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

This group of indices is similar to the System Average Interruption
Frequency Index (SAIFI) value that many utilities have calculated for
years. SARFIx, however, assesses more than just interruptions. The
frequency of occurrence of rms variations of varying magnitudes can be
assessed using SARFIx. Note that SARFIx is defined for short-duration
variations as defined by IEEE Standard 1159.
There are three additional indices that are subsets of SARFIx. These
indices assess variations of a specific IEEE Standard 1159 duration
category:
1. System Instantaneous Average RMS (Variation) Frequency Index
(SIARFIx).
2. System Momentary Average RMS (Variation) Frequency Index
(SMARFIx).
3. System Temporary Average RMS (Variation) Frequency Index
(STARFIx).
8.3.3
SARFI for the EPRI DPQ project
Table 8.1 shows the statistics for various forms of SARFI computed
for the measurements taken by the EPRI DPQ project. These partic-
ular values are rms variation frequencies for substation sites in num-
ber of events per 365 days. One-minute temporal aggregation was
used, and the data were treated using sampling weights. This can
serve as a reference benchmark for distribution systems in the United
States.
8.3.4
Example index computation
procedure
This example is based on actual data recorded on one of the feeders
monitored during the EPRI DPQ project.1 This illustrates some of the
practical issues involved in computing the indices.
336
Chapter Eight
SARFI90
SARFI80
SARFI70
SARFI50
SARFI10
SARFICBEMA
SARFIITIC
SARFISEMI
Minimum
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
CP05†
11.887
5.594
0.000
0.000
0.000
5.316
2.791
2.362
CP50†
43.987
22.813
12.126
5.165
1.525
25.465
18.765
13.619
Mean
56.308
28.729
18.422
8.926
3.694
33.293
25.390
18.535
CP95†
135.185
66.260
51.000
27.037
13.519
71.413
51.500
38.238
Maximum
207.644
103.405
70.535
56.311
35.689
149.488
140.768
140.768
*Submitted for IEEE Standard P1564.8
†CP05, CP50, and CP95 are abbreviations that indicate that the value exceeds 5, 50, and 95 percent of the sam-
ples in the database. For example, 50 percent of the sites in the project had more than 18.765 events per year that
were outside the ITI curve voltage tolerance envelope (SARFIITIC).
TABLE 8.1
SARFI Statistics from the EPRI DPQ Project*
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

First, one must know how many customers experience a voltage
exceeding the index threshold for each rms variation that occurs.
Obviously, every customer will not be individually monitored.
Consequently, one must approximate the voltage experienced by each
customer during a disturbance. This is accomplished by segmenting
the circuit into small areas across which all customers are assumed to
experience the same voltage. Obviously, the smaller the segments, the
better the approximation.
One method of determining voltages for many circuit segments based
on a limited number of monitoring points is power quality state esti-
mation. A special section (8.7) is included on this topic later. State esti-
mation provides pseudomeasurements for those segments not
containing a measuring instrument. Such state estimation requires a
moderately detailed circuit model and known monitored data. Without
the pseudomeasurements provided by state estimation, the number of
physical monitoring locations becomes the number of constant-voltage
segments upon which the indices that are calculated. This is referred
to as monitor-limited segmentation (MLS) and results in only a few seg-
ments per circuit. Although the calculated index values are less accu-
rate, MLS still yields indices that are informative.
Figure 8.3 illustrates the three MLS segments for the example cal-
culation feeder corresponding to the three power quality monitors, M1,
M2, and M3. The exact number of customers served from each MLS
Power Quality Benchmarking
337
Figure 8.3
Circuit for example rms varia-
tion calculation.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

segment was not available, so values of 500, 100, and 400 were
assumed for segments 1, 2, and 3, respectively, based on the load. With
these assumptions, 1 year of monitoring data yielded the results sum-
marized in Table 8.2.
The sag indices are typical of what would be expected. The number
of customer disturbances decrease as the voltage threshold decreases.
There were very few voltage swells on this feeder. The total number of
sags per customer is estimated at 27.5 per year. Of these, only 7.3 are
below 70 percent and 4.8 are below 50 percent. These two levels are
typically where end users begin to experience problems, and utilities
that use these indices typically set benchmark targets close to these
values.
The SARFI10 value of 4.3 cannot be compared to SAIFI because
SAIFI reflects only sustained interruptions. The duration-based
indices—SIARFI, SMARFI, and STARFI—are also quite interesting.
The majority of the disturbances are classified as instantaneous by
IEEE Standard 1159. Only 4.8 of the 27.5 sag disturbances are either
momentary or temporary. However, these tend to be the more severe
sags (magnitude of 50 percent and less).
8.3.5
Utility applications
Utilities are using the discussed rms variation indices to improve their
systems.9 One productive use of the indices is to compute the separate
indices for individual substations as well as the system index for sev-
eral substations. The individual substation values are then compared
to the system value. Those substations that exhibit significantly poor
performance as compared to the system performance are targeted for
maintenance efforts. Based on the sensitivity and needs of the cus-
tomers served from the targeted substations, the economic viability of
potential mitigating actions is assessed. The indices have also proven
338
Chapter Eight
TABLE 8.2
Example RMS Variation Index Values
Calculated for Circuit of Fig. 8.3 Based on 1 Year
of Actual Monitored Data
x
SARFIx
SIARFIx
SMARFIx
STARFIx
140
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
120
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
110
0.5
0.5
0.0
0.0
90
27.5
22.7
4.3
0.5
80
13.6
8.8
4.3
0.5
70
7.3
2.5
4.3
0.5
50
4.8
0.5
3.8
0.5
10
4.3
Undefined
3.8
0.5
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

to be excellent tools for communicating performance of the power deliv-
ery system in a simplified manner to key industrial customers.
8.4
Harmonics Indices
Power electronic devices offer electrical efficiencies and flexibility but
present a double-edged coordination problem with harmonics. Not only
do they produce harmonics, but they also are typically more sensitive
to the resulting distortion than more traditional electromechanical
load devices. End users expecting an improved level of service may
actually experience more problems. This section discusses power qual-
ity indices for assessing the quality of service with respect to harmonic
voltage distortion. Before we get into the definition of the indices, some
issues regarding sampling are discussed.
8.4.1
Sampling techniques
Power quality engineers typically configure power quality monitors to
periodically record a sample of voltage and current for each of the three
phases and the neutral. The measurements typically consist of a single
cycle, but longer samples may be needed to capture such phenomena as
interharmonics. The power quality monitors take samples at intervals
of 15 to 30 min and record thousands of measurements that are sum-
marized by the indices. Besides harmonic distortion, the recorded
waveforms yield information about other steady-state characteristics
such as phase unbalance, power factor, form factor, and crest factor. We
will focus here on harmonic content.
The fundamental quantity used to form the indices is the THD of the
voltage. The definition of THD may be found in Chap. 5 and is repeated
here in Eq. (8.1):
VTHD 
(8.1)
Voltage distortion is not a constant value. On a typical system, the
harmonic distortion follows daily, weekly, and seasonal patterns. An
example of daily patterns of total harmonic voltage distortion for 1 week
is shown in Fig. 8.4. This is typical for many residential feeders where
the voltage distortion is highest late at night when the load is low.
A useful method of summarizing the THD samples of trends like that
in Fig. 8.4 is to create a histogram like that shown in Fig. 8.5. Note the
two distinct peaks in the distribution, which reflects the bimodal
nature of the harmonic distortion trend.

∞
h  2
V

h
2

V1
Power Quality Benchmarking
339
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Once the histogram is prepared, the cumulative frequency curve is
computed. This is shown overlaying the histogram in Fig. 8.5 and has
been pulled out separately in Fig. 8.6 to demonstrate the computation of
the 95th percentile value, known as CP95. In this example, a voltage
THD of 3.17 percent is larger than 95 percent of all other samples in the
distribution. CP95 is frequently more valuable than the maximum value
of a distribution because it is less sensitive to spurious measurements.
Usually an electric utility will collect measurements at more than
one location and compute a different CP95 value for each monitoring
location. Figure 8.7 shows a histogram of CP95 values compiled from
different sites, which serves to summarize the measurements both
340
Chapter Eight
0%
1%
2%
3%
4%
5/1/95
5/3/95
5/5/95
5/7/95
5/9/95
VTHD
Figure 8.4
Trend of voltage total harmonic distortion demonstrat-
ing daily cycle for 1 week.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0.0%
0.4%
0.8%
1.2%
1.6%
2.0%
2.4%
2.8%
3.2%
3.6%
4.0%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Cumulative Frequency
Count of Samples
VTHD
Figure 8.5
Histogram of voltage total harmonic distortion for 1 month
demonstrating bimodal distribution.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

temporally and spatially. A CP95 value can also be determined from
this histogram, which is a “statistic of a statistic” that can be used to
provide a reference value for an entire utility system.
8.4.2
Characterization of three-phase
harmonic voltage measurements
Many distribution systems in the United States supply single-phase
and other unbalanced loads. Therefore, the harmonic content of each
Power Quality Benchmarking
341
0.0%
0.4%
0.8%
1.2%
1.6%
2.0%
2.4%
2.8%
3.2%
3.6%
4.0%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Cumulative Frequency
CP95 = 3.17%
VTHD
Figure 8.6
Demonstration of graphical method of calculating the CP95
of a distribution.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.0%
0.4%
0.8%
1.2%
1.6%
2.0%
2.4%
2.8%
3.2%
3.6%
4.0%
4.4%
4.8%
5.2%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Cumulative Frequency
Count of Sites
VTHD
Figure 8.7
Histogram of CP95 values for voltage THD at 54 moni-
toring sites.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

primary phase voltage is generally different. This presents a problem
in characterizing the harmonic distortion of a three-phase measure-
ment which has varying distortion levels on each phase. There are two
possible methods:
1. Consider each phase to be a separate measurement. The potential
problem with this method is that a count of how often distortion lev-
els exceed a specified level could be 3 times too large.
2. Average the distortion levels on the three phases. Each three-phase
steady-state measurement contributes a single distortion level to
the samples. A possible drawback is that a high distortion level on
one phase is obscured if the other two phases exhibit low distortion
levels.
The latter method has less potential for inaccuracy and is used for
calculating the harmonic distortion indices presented here.
8.4.3
Definition of harmonic indices
Scalable indices have been developed to aid in the assessment of the
quality of service related to harmonic voltage distortion for a specified
circuit. As with other indices, they can be applied to various parts of the
utility system. An index value for the whole system serves as a useful
metric but is not intended as an exact representation of the quality of
service provided to each individual customer. However, it can be used
as a benchmark against which index values for selected areas within
the distribution system can be compared.
System total harmonic distortion CP95 (STHD95).
STHD95 represents
the CP95 value of a weighted distribution of the individual circuit seg-
ment CP95 values for voltage THD (see earlier discussion concerning
Fig. 8.7). STHD95 is defined by Eqs. (8.2) and (8.3):
 0.95
(8.2)
 0.95
(8.3)
where
s  circuit segment number
i  steady-state THD measurement number 

CP95s
∞
fs (xi)


∞
∞
fs (xi)

STHD95
∞
ft (CP95s)  Ls


∞
∞
ft (CP95s)  Ls
342
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Ls  connected kVA served from circuit segment s
fs (xi)  probability distribution function comprised of sam-
pled THD values for circuit segment s
CP95s  95th percentile cumulative probability value; it is a
statistical quantity representing the value of THD
which is larger than exactly 95 percent of the sam-
ples comprising the THD distribution for segment s
ft(CP95s)  probability distribution function comprised of the
individual circuit segment THD CP95 values
Equipment degradation due to harmonics is often the result of sus-
tained distortion over long periods of time. High THD levels that
decrease after a relatively short duration may not affect end-user or
utility equipment as much. CP95 neglects the highest distortion sam-
ples. Thus, 5 percent of the samples can be very high, as might be the
case for a circuit exhibiting short-duration harmonic increases, without
significantly affecting the index value. IEEE Standard 51910 specifies
that THD limits are not to be exceeded for more than 1 h per day, which
is approximately 4 percent of the time. Thus, the STHD95 value will
approximately correspond to the allowable duration limits defined for
excessive THD values in the IEEE standard.
System average total harmonic distortion (SATHD).
SATHD is based on
the mean value of the distribution of voltage THD measurements
recorded for each circuit segment rather than the CP95 value.
SATHD represents the weighted average voltage THD experienced
over the monitoring period normalized by the total connected kVA
served from the assessed system. SATHD is defined by Eqs. (8.4) and
(8.5):
SATHD 
(8.4)
MEANTHDs 
(8.5)
where
s  circuit segment number
k  total number of circuit segments in the system
being assessed
Ls  connected kVA served from circuit segment s

NMW
i  1 THDi

NMW

k
s  1 Ls  MEANTHDs

LT
Power Quality Benchmarking
343
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

LT  total connected kVA served from the system
being assessed
i  steady-state measurement number
THDi  voltage total harmonic distortion calculated for
measurement window i
NMW  total number of steady-state measurement win-
dows collected for a given circuit segment over
the duration of the monitoring period
MEANTHDs  statistical mean of the THD values obtained
from each of the steady-state measurement win-
dows for circuit segment s
These harmonic distortion indices are weighted by connected kVA.
This is one method to give more weight to data from monitoring sites
deemed more important. This weighting may also be determined by the
number of customers, the amount of actual load, sensitivity of customer
loads, etc. Connected load is similar to weighting methods specified in
IEC Standard 1000-3-6, Assessment of Emission Limits for Distorting
Loads in MV and HV Power Systems.
System average excessive total harmonic distortion ratio indexTHD level
(SAETHDRITHD).
SAETHDRITHD is a measure of the number of steady-
state measurements that exhibit a THD value exceeding the specified
threshold. It is more difficult to calculate frequency-of-occurrence
indices for steady-state phenomena such as harmonics because they
are not triggered measurements. Without continuously recording data,
steady-state quantities can only be assessed using sampled data. An
approximation of the amount of time the system THD exceeded a cer-
tain value can be calculated from the ratio of excessive THD samples to
the total number of samples. This ratio is considered to be the fre-
quency of occurrence of a specified threshold THD value.
For each circuit segment comprising the assessed system, the num-
ber of measurements exceeding the THD threshold is normalized by
the total number of measurements. The system average is then com-
puted by weighting each segment ratio by the load served from that
segment. SAETHDRITHD is defined by
SAETHDRITHD 
(8.6)
where
s  circuit segment number
k  total number of circuit segments in the system being
assessed

k
s  1
Ls 
N
N
T
M
H
W
Ds
s


LT
344
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Ls  connected kVA served from circuit segment s
LT  total connected kVA served from the system being
assessed
i  steady-state measurement number
THD  THD threshold specified for calculation of this index
NTHDs  number of steady-state measurements that exhibit a
THD value for segment s which exceeds the specified
THD threshold value
NMWs  total number of steady-state measurements recorded
for segment s over the assessment period
SAETHDRITHD provides a measure of the portion of the time that the
designated system exceeds a specified THD value. For example, we can
use SATHEDRI5% to approximate the amount of time the defined sys-
tem exceeds the IEEE Standard 519-1992 THD limit of 5 percent.
8.4.4
Harmonic benchmark data
Figure 8.8 shows how temporal average voltage THD is distributed for
277 sites in the EPRI DPQ Project. Nearly 18 percent of the monitor-
ing sites had an average value of voltage THD of 1.2 percent for the
period from 6/1/93 to 3/1/95. The data have been treated by using sam-
pling weights designed so that the charts represent an estimate of the
entire distribution systems of the 24 EPRI DPQ utilities. The 95 per-
cent confidence level means that we are 95 percent confident that the
true mean of the sample population is between 1.43 and 1.71 percent.
The mean of the distribution is the same as that of the SATHD index.
Power Quality Benchmarking
345
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
0.0
0.6
1.8
1.2
2.4
3.0
3.6
4.2
4.8
5.4
6.0
6.6
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Cumulative Frequency
Frequency of Sites
VTHD (%)
Mean (SATHD):
1.57%
Standard Deviation: 0.0714%
95% Confidence Interval:
1.43% to 1.71%
Figure 8.8
Histogram of average value for voltage THD at 277 mon-
itoring sites from 6/1/93 to 3/1/95 (treated by sampling weights).
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Figure 8.9 presents the distribution of the CP95 values of voltage
THD at all the sites. The average CP95 value for the data sampled in
the project was 2.18 percent. Computing the CP95 of the data pre-
sented in Fig. 8.9 gives the STHD95 index, 4.03 percent. The larger
spread of samples between 0.2 and 6.4 percent THD causes the wider
95 percent confidence interval. The number of monitoring locations
that exceeded the limits established by IEEE Standard 519-1992 can
also be obtained from this chart. Of the sites monitored, 3.3 percent
exceeded the 5 percent voltage THD limit for at least 5 percent of sam-
ples. (Only one monitored substation exceeded the IEEE Standard 519-
1992 limit for more than 95 percent of samples.)
8.4.5
Seasonal effects
Harmonic distortion varies seasonally as well as daily and weekly.
Figure 8.10 shows the SATHD index for each of the 27 months of mon-
itoring in the EPRI DPQ project. A simple average of site values was
used without the sampling weights. A seasonal pattern is very evident.
Voltage THD tends to be lower during the winter and summer months
and peaks in the spring and fall months.
The periods of low THD correspond with peak loading periods of the
year due to heating and air conditioning demand. Air conditioning load
apparently provides for more damping effect than heating load, which
might be counterintuitive. The capacitor configurations will also
change for these seasons, which may also affect the distortion.
Note that the distortion trends are upward during the 2-year moni-
toring period. Each yearly trend is slightly higher than the previous.
346
Chapter Eight
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
0.0
0.6
1.8
1.2
2.4
3.0
3.6
4.2
4.8
5.4
6.0
6.6
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
10%
30%
50%
70%
90%
Cumulative Frequency
Frequency of Sites
VTHD (%)
Mean :
2.18%
CP95 (STHD95):
4.03%
Standard Deviation:
0.101%
95% Confidence Interval:
1.99% to 2.38%
Figure 8.9
Histogram of CP95 value for voltage THD at 277 moni-
toring sites from 6/1/93 to 3/1/95 (treated by sampling weights).
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

This would suggest that there is some validity to the increased concern
about the proliferation of harmonic-producing power electronic equip-
ment. Increases in background harmonic distortion attributable to
increasing percentages of nonlinear loads have been observed by others
as well.11
8.5
Power Quality Contracts
Once performance targets have been selected, utilities may enter into
contractual agreements with end users with respect to power quality
variations. While this is never an easy task, it was simpler when end
users had to deal only with a single, vertically integrated utility com-
pany. The deregulation of the electric power utilities in many areas fur-
ther complicates things. As Kennedy12 points out regarding future
trends, there now might be up to five entities involved:
1. The transmission provider (TRANSCO)
2. The local distributor (DISTCO), or the “wires” company
3. One or more independent power producers (IPPs) or market power
producers (MPPs)
4. Retail energy marketers (RETAILCOs) or energy service companies
(ESCOs)
5. The end user
To meet the performance requirements of the end user, there may
have to be contracts between all these entities. While the bulk of the
Power Quality Benchmarking
347
1.0%
1.2%
1.4%
1.6%
1.8%
2.0%
SATHD
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Month of Project
1995
1994
1993
Figure 8.10
SATHD values by month, from 6/1/93 to 9/1/95, unweighted, all sites.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

power quality variations may be the result of events on the local dis-
tributor’s system, there will also be events on the transmission sys-
tem that will affect large areas. Forced outages at power plants can
cause spikes in the power market and, perhaps, voltage regulation
issues if the power supply becomes constrained. The retail energy
marketer, if any, may ultimately be responsible for financial obliga-
tions and could coordinate the agreements and present a single point
of contact for the end user.
Detailed descriptions of service agreements are outside the scope of
this book. Some important characteristics of contracts for rms voltage
variations and harmonics are presented in Sections 8.5.1 and 8.5.2.
More details may be found in the Power Quality Standards and
Specifications Workbook.13
8.5.1
RMS variations agreements
Part of the purpose of an interconnection agreement would be to edu-
cate end users on the realities of power delivery by wire and the costs
associated with mitigating voltage sags and interruptions. Another
part would be the establishment of some formal means by which the
utility records and evaluates the fault performance of its power deliv-
ery system.
Some of the key issues that should be addressed are
1. The number of interruptions expected each year.
2. The number of voltage sags below a certain level each year. The level
can be defined in terms of a specific number such as 70 or 80 percent.
Alternatively, it can be defined in terms of a curve such as the
CBEMA or ITI curve.
3. The means by which end users can mitigate rms variations.
4. Responsibilities of utilities in analyzing the performance of the
power delivery system, following up with fault events, etc.
5. Maintenance efforts to reduce the number of faults for events within
the control of the utility.
8.5.2
Harmonics agreements
Although harmonics problems are not as widespread as rms voltage varia-
tion problems, harmonics from ASDs and other electronic loads can have a
severe impact on other end-user equipment. In some cases, the equipment
will fail to operate properly, while in other cases, it may suffer premature
failure. Therefore, agreements regarding harmonics can be very important.
The chief tool for the enforcement of harmonic emissions at the util-
ity-customer interface is IEEE Standard 519-1992.10 This is a two-
348
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

edged sword: One part of the standard places limits on harmonic cur-
rents that can be injected by end-user loads onto the system, while
another part effectively establishes minimum requirements for the
utility. Agreements on harmonics should reflect this bilateral nature.
Some of the key issues that should be addressed are
1. Definition of the PCC.
2. Limitation of the harmonic current distortion level at the PCC to
that set by IEEE Standard 519-1992 or to another value allowed by
a specified exception.
3. Periodic maintenance schedules for filters and other mitigating
equipment. Some equipment will require constant monitoring by
permanently installed devices.
4. Responsibilities of utilities, such as
a. Keeping the system out of harmonic resonance
b. Keeping records about new loads coming onto the system (this is
getting tougher to do with deregulation)
c. Performing engineering analyses when new loads come onto the
system to prevent exacerbation of existing problems
d. Educating end users about mitigation options
e. Periodic monitoring or constant monitoring by permanently
installed devices to verify proper operation of the system
5. Definition of responsibilities for mitigation costs when limits are
exceeded. Is the last end user who created the excess load responsi-
ble or is the cost shared among a class of end users and the utility?
8.5.3
Example contract
One of the most widely publicized examples of a power quality contract
is the one between Detroit Edison and the “big three” automobile man-
ufacturers. Detloff and Sabin14 report that in 1995 Detroit Edison
entered into long-term pricing and service quality agreements with
Chrysler Corporation (now DaimlerChrysler), Ford Motor Company,
and General Motors Corporation. The terms were specified in an
agreement known as the Special Manufacturing Contract (SMC). The
service agreement covered voltage interruptions and voltage sags and
established service guarantees with compensation.
In response to competitive pressures, Detroit Edison entered into the
10-year agreement with these customers as a sole supplier of power.
The service guarantees were created in response to the customers’ con-
cern that the utility might not have as much incentive to resolve power
quality problems if the customers were locked into a 10-year sole-sup-
plier agreement. Therefore, the parties devised a method of compen-
sating the customers for power quality events if the annual schedule of
power quality targets was exceeded. Compensation levels were negoti-
ated that were related to the cost of customer production losses follow-
Power Quality Benchmarking
349
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ing an interruption. These levels were fixed for the duration of the
SMC. Initially, only interruptions of power were included in the guar-
antees. In 1998, voltage sag guarantees were added that made Detroit
Edison liable if voltage sag measures exceeded the negotiated perfor-
mance targets.
Therefore, monitoring of the power quality and computation of the
service indices are of very high importance. Detroit Edison installed a
power quality monitoring system at over 50 of the three customers’
locations throughout its territory. The power quality monitoring sys-
tem allows Detroit Edison to determine the frequency and severity of
voltage sags that occur at the customer locations. Some of the key
details follow.
Interruption 
targets.
The 
interruption 
targets 
for 
the
DaimlerChrysler and General Motors locations are either 0 or 1. This
means that only one interruption is allowed at some of these locations
and none at other locations in each calendar year. The service guar-
antee payment amounts (SGPAs) negotiated for these two companies
range between $2000 and $297,000 and are based on the type of
process that is being served. Several of these locations operate with
their services in parallel so that they usually do not experience a zero-
voltage event.
The Ford agreement was a little different. The locations were split
into six groups with interruption targets ranging from one to nine per
year. The utility would pay for interruptions in excess of these targets
at the rate specified by the negotiated SGPA. Interestingly, the targets
decrease by 5 percent each calendar year, rounded to the nearest whole
number, requiring continually improving performance by the utility.
Voltage sag targets.
The 1994 agreement specified that voltage sags
would be included in the compensation scheme at a later date. The
delay was considered reasonable because Detroit Edison had no
means in place for taking statistically accurate power quality mea-
surements. Installations of power quality monitors began in 1995
with a total of 138 monitors installed at the SMC locations. The util-
ity and the customers finalized the voltage sag agreement ahead of
schedule at the insistence of the customers in August 1998, having
only about 2 years of measurements for the basis of the initial sag
targets. It would have been preferable to have about 3 years to estab-
lish the targets. The sag agreement was made retroactive to January
1, 1998.
The monitors are connected to measure phase-to-ground voltages at
the 13.2-kV bus and phase-to-phase voltages at the 4.8-kV buses. Each
power quality monitor is automatically polled several times a day using
350
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

three modems, each dedicated to one of the three customers. The mea-
surements are then stored in the main monitoring database on a
server. A workstation running Electrotek’s PQView program queries
the database and imports the measurements into a database on a Web
server. The rms voltage variations are characterized and the voltage
sag indices computed.
The 1998 SMC amendment states five rules that establish a subset
of sags that qualify for payment.
1. The rms voltage on any of the three phases must drop below 0.75
pu. There is no minimum duration for qualifying voltage sags; all dura-
tions are eligible. The threshold was established based on the ITI curve
and discussions with the customers. Actual experience is not a factor in
the sag qualification.
2. Voltage sags that are caused by the customer are excluded from
the qualifying sag list.
3. Voltage sags that are measured on a nonloaded feeder are not
qualifying. This is automatically determined in the PQView program
from the maximum load current. Rules 2 and 3 are in place to ensure
that the performance is only evaluated at the PCC.
4. Only the worst voltage sag (lowest rms voltage) in a 15-min inter-
val at each location can qualify. The 15-min interval begins when the
first sag in a chronological list of sags is detected and ends when either
the last sag in the interval is detected or at a point 15 min after the
first. Voltage sags that occur after that 15-min interval are considered
part of the next interval and are assessed separately. This type of pro-
cessing is called 15-min temporal aggregation with spatial aggregation
by location.
5. If a voltage interruption is measured during a 15-min interval,
then any voltage sags that are also measured at the location will not
qualify.
According to Detloff and Sabin,14 approximately 20 percent of all the
voltage sags measured by the Detroit Edison power quality monitoring
system (nonaggregated) fall below 0.75 pu. Only about 8 percent of the
nonaggregated sags qualify after applying the five sag rules and for
which sag scores are computed.
Sag score definition.
The sag score is the average per-unit voltage lost
by each of the three phase voltages for the lowest qualifying voltage sag
within a 15-min interval. It is defined by Eq. (8.7):
Sag score  1 
(8.7)
VA  VB  VC

3
Power Quality Benchmarking
351
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

For interruptions, the sag score is defined to be zero to prevent overlap
with the administration of voltage interruptions. If any of the phase
voltages are greater than 1 pu because of a neutral shift during a volt-
age sag, then each is set to 1 pu before the computation of the sag score.
These two policies confine scores to the range 0.0833 to 1. The mini-
mum sag score of 0.0833 corresponds to a condition where the voltage
on one phase is 0.75 pu, which is the threshold for a qualifying voltage
sag, and the other two phase voltages are set to 1 pu.
Detloff and Sabin reported that the average sag score from January
1, 1998, until their paper was prepared in 2000 was 0.31, with 87 per-
cent of the sag scores being less than or equal to 0.50.
Sag score targets.
A sag score target is the maximum sum of sag score
values allowable for a group of locations before compensation is due.
Two of the automakers have only one group score target, while the
third has six. The sag scores for all qualifying sags in a group are
summed and compared to the group sag score target. If the sag score
total exceeds the target, compensation is computed.
The SMC agreement allows sag score targets to be recomputed for
the eight groups at the start of each calendar year. The group sag score
targets are determined by computing the average group sag score
totals for the voltage sag data collected from 1995 and up to the present
year. The targets are expected to gradually stabilize as data from more
years are included.
Voltage sag payment.
The payment due to a location is computed by
determining the sag score sum in excess of the sag score target multiplied
by the SGPAsubject to an annual payment cap. For example, assume that
a location has an SGPAof $100,000 and a sag score target of 3.0. If the sag
score is 3.28, then a payment of 0.28  $100,000  $28,000 is due.
An alternative to the sag score method would be to categorize sags
into bins based on their magnitudes. Each bin would have a certain
level of payout relative to the SGPA. However, this could produce large
swings in payments and could disappoint customers. One significant
benefit of the sag score method is the lack of abrupt changes in sag
scores and payment amounts.
8.6
Power Quality Insurance*
This section proposes a brief overview of a pricing strategy for premium
power services that is founded on an insurance policy model.15,16
352
Chapter Eight
*Contributed by Snuller Price, Greg Ball, and C. K. Woo of Energy and Environmental
Economics, Inc.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

8.6.1
Overview of power quality insurance
concept
Offering premium power services requires the provider, either a dis-
tribution company or an energy services provider (referred to here-
after as the utility), to price the services in such a way as to provide
benefits to both customers and to the utility. Using an insurance model
in which customers subscribe to their desired level of improved power
quality (PQ) ensures that no customer will pay more than its own per-
ception of the value or benefit associated with the PQ services.
Customer benefits are unique in that they reflect each individual cus-
tomer’s damage function, including the customer’s risk aversion.
Utility benefits must reflect the risk associated with offering insur-
ance and include returns commensurate with operating in a new com-
petitive environment.
The premium PQ service program uses a business model involving
premiums and claims. The utility offers PQ services under an insur-
ance plan. Customers pay premiums for a defined level of service, and
the utility pays the customer directly for events exceeding the terms of
that service. Customers are motivated to pay a premium to reduce the
uncertainty and/or the expected value of their damage costs. Utilities
assume the financial risk associated with the claims in exchange for a
return on the aggregate premiums.
The utility’s insurance service can make use of a purely financial pol-
icy or a policy that incorporates investments in PQ equipment or ser-
vice. In both cases, the critical advantage of the insurance approach
over a cost-of-service approach is that it allows customers to self-select
an appropriate solution from policies that are designed without use of
customer damage cost data.
Insurance as a financial product.
The utility can create a purely finan-
cial insurance product in which it offers to pay customers for reliability
events covered by the policy, and customers pay premiums. Utilities
will use customer location to estimate an expected frequency of claims.
Because the expected frequency of claims is different for various cus-
tomer groupings, insurance premiums will likewise be different.
Premiums are calculated using principles of fair insurance with a mar-
gin that incorporates an appropriate level of risk mitigation and return
for the utility. The utility makes no additional investments in reliabil-
ity equipment or services with the purely financial product. Customers
who are risk averse, or who have a higher expectation of their claims
than the utility, will subscribe.
Incorporating PQ investments into insurance products.
A utility can
greatly increase the types of PQ insurance products it can offer if it con-
Power Quality Benchmarking
353
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

siders the role that PQ investments can play. By making such invest-
ments, the utility can offer insurance products with higher payout ratios
and improve customer service quality. To develop such products, the util-
ity must investigate the types of PQ solutions that could be implemented
for a group of customers with a similar event rate and location. For
example, for a given section of a feeder, there may be four different types
of PQ investments a utility could make, ranging from a tree-trimming
program to installation of UPS systems at customer sites. For each pos-
sible solution, the utility estimates the cost of the solution and the
improvement in power quality that would result. Based on these costs,
and the expected claims after the investment is made, the utility can
design insurance products that will cover their combined costs and pro-
vide the customers with an ensured level of improvement in their power
quality. Power quality insurance can be provided for a number of distri-
bution system events. Table 8.3 shows five general categories of PQ
problems and the associated claim payment structure.
8.6.2
Designing an insurance policy
The goals of a PQ insurance scheme are to recover the cost of providing the
plan, treat all customers within a group equally at cost-based premiums,
improve efficient use of resources, and be comprehensible and acceptable.
Fairness.
An insurance scheme is considered fair if the expected cost
of claims equals the premiums paid. For example, assume a customer’s
value of service (net of the energy rate) to be $x/kW, which is unob-
servable. Suppose the probability of an outage is r and the expected
benefit to the customer of electricity consumption is (1  r)x.
Now consider an insurance scheme in which a premium of $p/kW
results in an insurance payment of $x/kW in the event of an outage. This
means that the customer by buying insurance will obtain [rx  (1  r)x
 p]  x  p with certainty. The customer will buy the insurance if
354
Chapter Eight
TABLE 8.3
Proposed Claim Payment Structure for PQ Insurance in Five General
Categories
PQ category
Claim payment structure
RMS variations
$/event categorized by amount of variation as necessary. 
Incorporate any impact of duration into an event total.
Sustained interruptions
$/event
$/hour
Voltage regulation
$/hour categorized as necessary by magnitude indices.
Harmonics
$/hour categorized as necessary by component and 
magnitude indices.
Transients
$/event categorized as necessary by magnitude indices.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

x  p  rx
(8.8)
When p  (1  r)x, the insurance scheme is fair and cost-based.
Implementation.
Designing a basic area financial insurance option
involves the following steps:
Step 1.
Compute the area-specific probability of outage using his-
toric outage data. For example, the probability of an outage with a
duration of more than 1 h is
r (1 h) 
Step 2.
Compute the fair insurance premium for a given payoff. For
example, if payoff  $1/kW unserved and r (1 h)  0.0002, the fair
premium is $0.0002/kW unserved.
Step 3.
Adjust the premium to collect margin. Suppose the adder is
$0.0001/kW unserved; then the posted premium is $0.0003/kW
unserved.
Step 4.
Design service conditions. Here is an example.
■Subscription.
A participating customer subscribes to the example
option in step 3. The customer must specify the amount of kilowatts
unserved to be insured over a 1-year period. The annual premium
is computed as: kW unserved subscribed  premium/kW. The pre-
mium is an up-front payment, irrespective of whether outages actu-
ally occur.
■Eligibility for payoffs.
A participating customer will be paid
according to its subscription level, subject to the utility’s receipt of
the premium from the customer. In this example, payoffs will only
be for outages lasting more than 1 h.
8.6.3
Adjusting for PQ investment costs
The derivation in Sec. 8.6.2 applies to an insurance scheme in which
the utility does not make any investments in PQ improvement tech-
nologies. In a case where the utility does make such investments, the
cost of these investments is added into the premium:
p  (r′) y  investment cost  margin
(8.9)
where r′ is the probability of an outage after the investment is made
and y is the payout per outage.
annual unserved hours for such outages

8760 h
Power Quality Benchmarking
355
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The fact that investments in PQ solutions will often be financed
over a period of several years, and that many of these investments
are permanent in nature, raises the issue of whether or not the cus-
tomer will hold the insurance policy long enough to pay for the
investment cost. In such cases, the insurance policy should have a
clause stating that the policy duration is the full length of the finan-
cial life of the PQ solution, and that the customer is responsible for
paying for its share of the remaining cost of the solution should it
cancel the policy in advance.
Likewise, the utility’s ability to offer certain insurance products may
depend upon attaining a minimum level of customer subscription (i.e.,
a minimum total revenue requirement from customer premiums). In
such a case, a utility’s insurance policy offering can be predicated upon
the level of customer subscription.
8.7
Power Quality State Estimation
Power quality monitoring is a relatively new idea in the electric power
industry. While there are now many PQ monitors installed and opera-
ble, there are still considerably large gaps in coverage of the distribu-
tion feeders in the United States. As part of the EPRI RBM project,4
investigators explored the idea of estimating the voltages at locations
without monitors given the data at only one monitor or a few monitors.
This resulted in the development of the EPRI power quality state esti-
mator (PQSE), which uses feeder models and recorded data to estimate
what would have been recorded on the customer side of the service
transformer. In most cases, this can be done with sufficient accuracy to
estimate the indices such as SARFI.
The following describes, in very general terms, the approach taken
in the PQSE to determine the best match between the measured
results and the computed results. Most of the effort was focused on
rms variations, since this is the disturbance classification that has
the most widespread impact on the power quality. An overview of the
algorithm is given here. Additional details are available from EPRI to
eligible parties.
8.7.1
General approach
State estimation techniques have been used for many years on trans-
mission systems to determine steady-state voltage and load quantities.
The most common mathematical methods are based on the weighted
least squares (WLS) approach to minimizing the square of the error
between the measurements and the computed estimates of the load
quantities. By iterating through some kind of optimization solution
356
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

procedure, an estimate of the state of the circuit variables can be
obtained.
Baran and Kelley17 describe many of the issues related to performing
state estimation on distribution feeders. As with nearly all papers on
state estimation, their primary concern is the load-related, steady-state
voltages and currents throughout the feeders. Many of the same princi-
ples apply to estimating the various PQ variation phenomena. Of course,
there are some additional challenges in crafting specific algorithms.
The WLS method is typically summarized by first writing the equa-
tion relating the measurements and the state variables in the system:
z  h(x)  v
where
z  measurements
x  state variables
h(x)  function relating state variables to measurements
v  measurement errors
Then the WLS method boils down to minimizing the WLS errors over
all the measurements:

i
wi [zi  hi (x)]2
That is, this method finds vector x of state variables that minimize the
WLS error between the measurements and what they are computed to
be. The weights wi are assigned to denote the relative accuracy of the
measurements. The higher the accuracy of the measurement, the
greater the weight.
Many of the papers dealing with the state estimation for load quan-
tities have elaborate mathematical representations of the system
based on common formulations of the power flow problem and the
numerical methods for solving the WLS minimization. It is not easy,
and perhaps impossible, to accomplish a closed-form solution for all
kinds of PQ phenomena. Iterative simulation methods are employed
instead. Basically, a number of disturbance events that could have
caused what was observed are simulated and the result is compared
with measurements. Estimated values are stored from the simulation
matching the measurements most closely.
In many cases on the distribution feeder, we are constrained by the lack
of measurements in critical areas. We are forced to make some intelligent
guesses founded on simple rules and to take the best of these results.
Fortunately, a high degree of accuracy is generally not required to achieve
a reasonable estimate of state variables suitable for computing power
quality indices. For example, the voltage sag indices have relatively coarse
min

x
Power Quality Benchmarking
357
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

intervals (90, 70, 50, and 10 percent). A voltage sag of 55 percent falls in
the same bin as one of 65 percent, so the estimate can have a significant
error while still yielding meaningful indices.
The circuit model for PQ state estimation divides the system into a num-
ber of segments across which the power quality is assumed to be constant.
The segmentation is determined by the locations of the available monitors
and switches. Figure 8.11 shows the basic concept. This system is simu-
lated for several candidate events that might have caused the disturbance.
The simulations yielding the best fit to the measurements are assumed to
provide good estimates of the voltages at the locations without monitors.
8.7.2
Number of monitors
The EPRI PQSE was designed to function acceptably for only one mon-
itor at the substation. Of course, it would function better with more
358
Chapter Eight
BREAKER
FEEDER PQ
MONITOR
SEGMENT
CURRENT
MONITOR
RECLOSER
FUSE
CUSTOMER-SIDE
PQ MONITOR
Figure 8.11
Circuit with PQ monitors at various points.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

monitoring data. While some feeders have two or three monitors, most
have only one in the substation. This forces one to assume that all cus-
tomers experience the same voltage disturbance.
Despite the lack of confirming data along the feeder, useful results can
be produced with only one monitor. For example, there is generally more
concern with how the secondary-side voltages appear at important three-
phase customers than with voltages appearing along the feeder. Often
these customers are served with transformer connections that distort the
primary voltages during disturbances. This problem can be addressed sim-
ply by representing a portion of the feeder and an appropriately connected
transformer. This will yield results similar to having an actual monitor on
the secondary side, particularly if the customer is near the substation.
The accuracy in predicting the voltages along the feeder improves dra-
matically with the addition of just one more monitor on the feeder. This
monitor should be placed approximately one-half to two-thirds of the way
down the feeder so that there is considerable separation from the substa-
tion monitor. In staged tests with the rms variation estimation algorithm,
the estimator never failed to find the correct fault location (to the accu-
racy of the feeder model), whereas with only one monitor, the estimator
produced somewhat random predictions of where the fault was located.
Of course, in practice the models will be imprecise and the measurements
will also contain errors, so we cannot expect that the fault position will
always be predicted with such accuracy. However, it should be expected
that the estimates will improve considerably with just one more moni-
tor—even a customer-side monitor. Using three well-spaced monitors as
in the EPRI DPQ project gives good coverage of the main feeder.
Ideally, power quality state estimation would work best with fully
capable PQ monitors near the substation and on all the major branches
of a three-phase feeder. The limitations are three levels of monitoring
are listed in the table:
Monitor configuration level
Capabilities
1. Substation only
Adequate for cases in which it can be
assumed all customers on the feeder see the
same voltage.
2. Substation  customer-side monitors
Accuracy of prediction of voltages along the
feeder is considerably enhanced if customer
sites are significantly downline from the
substation. However, it is still difficult to
predict fault locations accurately since the
fault current path is not known.
3. Substation  PQ monitors on main 
Should yield the most accurate results.
three-phase feeder branches
Improves on capabilities gained by 
adding customer-side monitors by 
providing information on the feeder 
current flows.
Power Quality Benchmarking
359
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

8.7.3
Estimating rms variations
Voltage sags and interruptions are almost always due to short-circuit
faults. Therefore, the procedure for estimating voltages due to rms
variations is basically to find a fault on the feeder that produces volt-
ages and currents that most closely match what was measured on the
few existing monitors. Then the voltages are computed at all other
buses of interest and assumed to be what would have been measured if
a monitor had been present. Of particular interest are the voltages on
the load side of the service transformers.
One can always employ a brute force approach for searching out a
fault location on the feeder. There may be no alternative if there is only
one monitor on the system, and today’s fast computers actually make
this a practical approach in many cases. If there is more than one mon-
itor, one can program some intelligence into the search algorithm to
limit the search area. This is illustrated in Fig. 8.12. By observing the
currents measured by the monitors, it is determined that the fault is
downline from the first two monitors on the feeder. Therefore, the
search area is restricted to the shaded area.
Some new types of PQ monitoring equipment can provide an esti-
mate of the distance to the fault. This can be quite helpful in providing
a starting point for the simulation.
Customer-owned monitors can be quite helpful in identifying the prob-
able fault location. The load current data are probably not useful, but the
measured voltages can provide intelligence to improve the estimation.
While the customer-side monitors can be very helpful, there are a
number of potential problems with respect to rms variations:
1. The transformer connection, if not grounded wye-wye, may alter the
perception of the voltages seen on the primary feeder and, therefore,
by other customers. Thus, the monitor values do not represent the
primary system voltage. An effective rms variation estimator would
accommodate various transformer connections.
2. The phasing may not agree with the utility-side monitoring. This is
a constant bookkeeping problem. End users frequently alter their
installations, and any type of automatic estimating system for com-
puting PQ indices must have a facility for periodically correcting the
phasing.
3. The transformer impedance will alter the voltage measured for cer-
tain events.
4. The current measured at the end-user site represents only the cur-
rent into that individual load. This will be of limited use in deter-
mining the state of the feeder for PQ indices.
5. There is no direct communications link to get the data back to a cen-
tral site for timely processing.
360
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

8.7.4
Simulation engine requirements
The simulation engine for performing this type of PQ state estimation
has requirements similar to that of the fault simulator used to estimate
voltage sags for PQ planning (see Sec. 8.8). One of the most critical
pieces of information is what the voltage looks like on the end-user side
of the service transformer. In the United States, this transformer can
have one of several different connections. Therefore, the ability to
model a three-phase feeder in complete detail during fault conditions is
imperative. Some representation of load is also called for. However, tra-
ditional power flow models will be inadequate once the voltage drops
below 90 percent or so.
Another feature is the ability to scan through a range of possible
fault locations and magnitudes quickly. There may be hundreds of fault
events per year to be evaluated. Although modern computers are
becoming very fast, combining this need with the detailed circuit mod-
Power Quality Benchmarking
361
BREAKER
FEEDER PQ
MONITOR
SEGMENT
CURRENT
MONITOR
RECLOSER
FUSE
CUSTOMER-SIDE
PQ MONITOR
Monitors seeing
fault current
Limit search
to this area
N. O.
Figure 8.12
Intelligently limiting the search area for possible fault locations.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

eling capability creates an application that is quite taxing computa-
tionally. Nevertheless, useful calculations can be performed within a
reasonable time on modern personal computers.
One simplication that eases the computation and modeling burden is
to model only a few service transformers explicitly. Sometimes it is suf-
ficient to model only one example of each type of transformer connec-
tion found on the system. This will give a reasonably good accounting
of the phase-shifting effect of the connection without having to model
each individual transformer.
Likewise, classes of loads may be lumped. Loads with large amounts
of rotating machines will often have a tendency to counter the effects of
unbalanced voltage sags, while resistive loads are relatively passive.
Modeling at least one of each class will often provide a good picture of
the voltages experienced by end users. Of course, the solution engine
must be capable of providing suitable models for these loads.
8.8
Including Power Quality in Distribution
Planning
The traditional approach to distribution system planning calls for the
most economical system upgrades, timed to meet projected increases in
peak load. The main driver is reliability. Unless the utility has entered
into PQ contracts with severe penalties, power quality is not explicitly
included in planning decisions.
However, PQ considerations may justify modifying the investment
plan to provide better quality of service as well as sufficient capacity
and reliability.18–20 If the costs for lost production, cleanup, and equip-
ment damage were included to some degree, it is more likely that the
investment plan chosen would benefit both the utility and the cus-
tomers. The indices described previously provide a means of quantify-
ing power quality and should prove useful for evaluating planning
options where the service quality is of high value. The challenge is to
compute them from predictive models rather than historical data.
8.8.1
Planning process
Figure 8.13 is one way to compare the general utility investment plan-
ning criteria with both traditional and competitive criteria. The tradi-
tional criteria assume the customer’s cost of unserved load is very high,
so the best decision is what can serve the expected peak load at mini-
mum cost to the utility. This is often called least-cost planning. The risk
that the peak load will differ from the forecast has been assumed by the
utility ratepayers, so planning errors tend to be on the conservative
side. The utility invests in more capacity than actually needed at a
given time to keep ahead of the load growth.
362
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

In a competitive business environment, the utility must assume
more of the risk of uneconomical investments, while both customers
and the utility share the risks of unserved load. This leads to consider-
ation of customer damage costs in the planning decision shown by the
dashed curve in Fig. 8.13. As the capacity of the system increases, there
is likely to be less customer cost due to outages. The optimal planning
decision would theoretically minimize the U-shaped total-cost curve
(exaggerated for clarity) in Fig. 8.13. If customer costs were higher, the
optimal system capacity point would be shifted to the right. While this
new decision may be more economical overall, the utility may find it
difficult to accurately estimate the customer damage costs to justify
building less capacity. This might be hard to justify even if customer
costs are known to be lower. In this section, we are mainly interested
in looking at more costly investments that might be justified based on
costs to end users with sensitive loads.
The planning decision in Fig. 8.13 is mainly driven by system capac-
ity, which indirectly relates to reliability. Power quality impacts are an
important, but secondary, factor. To incorporate capacity and PQ costs
in the same planning process, only the investments that improve power
quality over the whole system, affecting more than one customer, are
considered. If there are localized PQ problems, or just one high-value
customer, it becomes more appropriate to consider point solutions or
even dedicated feeders.
Figure 8.14 shows a planning framework that can support planning
with PQ and other additional considerations. The base case is the exist-
Power Quality Benchmarking
363
Utility Cost
Customer Cost
Total Cost
Peak Planning
Peak Planning Decision
Min Total Cost
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
20.00
Cost
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
Capacity (MW)
Figure 8.13
Costs impacting the planning decision.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ing system with no planned investments; the so-called do-nothing case.
System performance is then simulated over the planning horizon, typi-
cally 5 to 10 years to reflect the riskier business environment for utili-
ties. Utility incremental costs might be set at zero in the base case, or
they might include vegetation control and fault restoration costs if those
will be under study later on. In each year, the system PQ performance
is calculated and the customer damage cost is accumulated over the
study system. The damage cost is a product of the system performance
indices at each load bus, and the customer costs corresponding to each
index. To simplify the study, these costs might only include high-value
customer loads for which reasonable cost estimates can be determined.
At the end of the planning horizon simulation, the net present value of
the total utility-plus-customer cost is evaluated. This becomes the cost
of the base case, or do-nothing case. Any attractive planning option
must have a net present value of total cost less than the base case.
To consider design alternatives for improved power quality, the plan-
ner schedules new investments, changes protective device settings,
364
Chapter Eight
Existing
System
Existing
Loads
Adjust
Loads
Next Year
Modify
System
Investment
Schedule,
O&M
PQ
Simulators
Total
Cost
Fault
Rates
Utility
Cost
PQ
Indices
Customer
PQ Cost
Growth
Rates
Load
Levels
PQ Category
Costs
Loop over
Planning
Horizon
Starts with
Do-Nothing
Case
Figure 8.14
Power quality planning process—thick arrows show inputs with significant
uncertainty.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

changes the vegetation control practice, etc. Some changes affect the
fault rates, some affect restoration times, some alter the base system,
and some may result in scheduled system upgrade investments. The
system is simulated again over the planning horizon with these
changes, and a new present worth of total cost is calculated. Note that
the customer load growth and cost data should not be changed during
this simulation, but they may be altered while assessing the risk of dif-
ferent planning scenarios.
This process may also be used to evaluate distribution generation,
demand-side management (DSM), and distribution automation (DA)
by incorporating the appropriate simulators.
8.8.2
Risk versus expected value
The basic planning process in Fig. 8.14 is tailored to minimizing the
expected value of total cost. This is the most common practice today,
but it should be adjusted to better consider risk.21
The planning decision is based on uncertain forecasts, to which
probabilities can be assigned. After the passage of time, the actual
planning scenario will become known, and the optimal solution will
also be known. It is not likely that the optimal solution will be chosen,
nor is it likely that errors in the planning decision can be completely
corrected. Therefore, there will be a deviation between the actual cost
and the optimal cost as inductively determined. The typical cost min-
imization is equivalent to minimizing the linear norm of actual devia-
tions from the optimal solution. An extreme risk-based approach
would minimize the infinity norm of actual deviations from the opti-
mal solution; in other words, it would minimize the maximum regret
that might occur. An intermediate approach would use the popular
euclidean norm to minimize the square of deviations from the optimal.
Both the expected value and the risk-based approaches require prob-
ability estimates for the various planning forecasts, but the quantity
minimized is different.
Expected value minimization works well when repeated trials can be
performed to mask undesirable results. For large investments in a
competitive business environment, however, a risk-based minimization
is probably more appropriate.
8.8.3
System simulation tools
The data requirements and analytical complexity for simulation soft-
ware in this planning method range from simple but uncertain, for
long-term capacity planning, to more detailed and complex, for design
and operational studies. Power quality data and analysis requirements
tend toward more detail, even for planning studies.
Power Quality Benchmarking
365
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Capacity planning.
A positive-sequence load flow program, with bal-
anced load models, can adequately support traditional capacity plan-
ning studies. The result of these studies would be a schedule of
investments in new capacity to serve expected load growth. The major
investments traditionally include substations, transformers, and feed-
ers. The schedule might call for substantial upgrades to existing facili-
ties or for brand new construction. Distributed generation has recently
been considered as an alternative to investments in substations, trans-
formers, and feeders. This may require a new generator model, but in
other respects the existing software would already be adequate.
Fault analysis.
To include rms variation impacts in the planning
process, it will be necessary to construct an explicit phase-by-phase sys-
tem model. The rms voltage variation magnitudes computed from sim-
ulations will be more accurate when full multiphase models are used.
For steady-state voltage unbalance, harmonic distortion, and transient
overvoltages, the accurate phase impedances are even more important.
For all types of variations, the loads must be modeled per phase.
The customer service transformers must also be modeled, with
explicit winding connections, in order to calculate rms variations. This
may be a new data requirement for the utility. While European systems
tend to have the same MV and LV connection throughout, others, par-
ticularly North American systems, use many different connections. The
customer transformer data may already be available for high-value
customers, for use in utility-customer device coordination studies.
Smaller customers can be aggregated by type of service transformer
and phase connection.
Harmonics and transients.
Harmonics and transients represent an
additional level of complexity in PQ simulation. One area where there
is an interesting planning issue is in the relationship between capaci-
tors and harmonics. Utilities routinely add capacitors to increase sys-
tem capacity. Others require end users to correct the power factor of
their loads to reduce demand on the system. Either can result in seri-
ous harmonic resonance problems. Of course, simulating these can be
time-consuming. It is not clear when it will be possible to have suffi-
cient tools and data to routinely include these phenomena in the plan-
ning cycle explicitly. Although there are tools for scanning proposed
plans for harmonic problems, most utilities will choose to address these
issue after they arise.
8.8.4
Fault incidence rates
One of the key inputs to rms voltage variation simulation is the inci-
dence rate for different kinds of faults. The simplest approach is to use
366
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

an average fault rate per unit length of line, with an average percent-
age of permanent faults and a nominal fault resistance based on sys-
tem design characteristics. In the United States, 0.06 fault/km (0.1
fault/mi) per year is commonly assumed, with about 20 percent of the
faults being permanent. The fault resistance is typically from 1 to 5 	,
although some utilities may use as high as 20 	.
For planning studies, it is important to segregate faults caused by
lightning from faults caused by vegetation. This can be done by outage
data analysis, by lightning performance simulation, or by using the
results of work in progress on vegetation-induced faults. With separate
fault categories, it becomes possible to simulate the effect of investing
in improved lightning protection such as line arresters, more vegeta-
tion control, and better fault-locating equipment on the system’s PQ
performance. Without separate fault categories, some of the important
PQ improvement methods cannot be evaluated for planning purposes.
The model should also include a separate category for faults on the
subtransmission or transmission system (HV system), because these
faults are not mitigated by some of the countermeasures that work for
faults on distribution feeders.
8.8.5
Overcurrent device response
A key component of rms voltage variation simulation is the response of
the overcurrent protective device system. Each feeder segment is
assumed to experience faults at some annual rate. The faults can be
subdivided according to phases involved, percentage of temporary
faults, fault resistance, etc. This can result in different sequences of
events and patterns of rms variations.
The behavior of utility fault-clearing devices can be quite compli-
cated. Figure 8.15 shows one algorithm for performing the simulation
for a specific fault location and type. It uses a priority queue to estab-
lish the overcurrent device operating time. A detailed, multiphase
short-circuit algorithm calculates the load voltages and protective
device currents while the fault is applied. Each protective device in the
system uses the calculated currents and voltages to predict the next
state change for that device and pushes the time of that state change
onto the priority queue of device events. After all protective devices
have been analyzed, the event with highest priority (lowest time) is
executed. That device changes state between open and closed, chang-
ing the circuit model. All the other devices use the actual time of the
state change to update their internal states using the calculated cur-
rents and voltages. The priority queue of device events is cleared, and
the fault currents and voltages are recalculated for the new circuit
topology. The simulation of the fault ends when there are no events
pushed onto the priority queue by any of the devices. The fault itself is
Power Quality Benchmarking
367
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

a “device” and may push a clearing time for temporary faults, whenever
the fault has been deenergized by a device opening.
The calculated load voltages and event durations are used to deter-
mine interruptions and rms variations according to the definition
described in this chapter. When the fault simulation ends, all the load
costs are calculated and the next fault type and location are considered.
The following briefly describes how the protective devices are han-
dled. All devices are assumed to operate correctly, except for relay
368
Chapter Eight
Apply Fault
Fault
Analysis
Calculate State-
Change Time
Update Device
State
New Circuit
Model
Currents,
Voltages
Switching
All
Devices
All
Devices
Push
Event
Priority
Queue
First-Event
Time
Clear
Queue
Next Fault If No
More Events
Figure 8.15
Event-based fault simulation using a priority queue.
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

overtravel and sympathetic tripping, since this can circumvent mea-
sures taken specifically to improve power quality.
Circuit breaker with relay.
A circuit breaker will schedule an opening
event if its currents, adjusted by the associated current transformer
ratio, exceed the associated relay pickup setting. If the relay has an
instantaneous setting and the current exceeds that level, the event
time will be the relay instantaneous pickup time plus the breaker
clearing time. Otherwise, the event time will depend on the relay’s
time-current characteristic. If the relay is of the definite-time type, this
will be a constant relay setting plus breaker clearing time. If the relay
is of the inverse type, this will be a current-dependent time plus the
breaker clearing time. We use approximate time-current curves for
both relays and reclosers.
If the fault current is removed before the breaker opens, an internal
relay travel state variable is updated. This may produce a sympathetic
trip due to relay inertia. If no sympathetic trip is predicted, an event
for full reset is then pushed onto the priority queue.
The circuit breaker may have one or two reclosure settings. If the
breaker has opened, it will schedule a closing operation at the appro-
priate time. In case there are subsequent events from other devices, the
breaker model must manage an internal state variable of time accu-
mulated toward the reclose operation. The time between opening and
reclosing is a constant. Once the breaker recloses, it follows the defined
fault-clearing behavior. There may be two reclosings, at different time
settings, before the breaker locks out and pushes no more events.
Fault.
A permanent fault will not schedule any events for the priority
queue, but will have an associated repair time. Any customers without
power at the end of the fault simulation will experience a sustained
interruption, of duration equal to the repair time.
A temporary fault will schedule a clearing event whenever its voltage
is zero. Whenever the fault is reenergized before clearing, any accu-
mulated clearing time is reset to zero. Upon clearing, the fault switch
state changes from closed to open, and then the fault simulation must
continue to account for subsequent device reclosures.
Fuse.
A fuse will open when the fault current and time applied pene-
trate the minimum melting curve, or when the I2t product reaches the
minimum melting I2t. We use minimum melt rather than total clearing
time in order to be conservative in studies of fuse saving; this would not
be appropriate for device coordination studies. Expulsion fuses are
modeled with a spline fit to the manufacturer’s time-current curve,
while current-limiting fuses are modeled with I2t. In both cases, if the
Power Quality Benchmarking
369
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

fault is interrupted before the fuse melts, an internal preheating state
variable is updated in case the fault is reapplied. However, we do not
specifically track possible fuse damage during the simulation.
If the fuse currents will penetrate the time-current curve or mini-
mum melting I2t, then a fuse melting time is pushed onto the priority
queue. If the fuse currents are too low to melt the fuse, no event is
pushed. Once the fuse opens, downstream customers will experience a
sustained interruption equal to the fuse repair time.
Recloser.
The recloser model is very similar to the circuit breaker with
relay model previously discussed. The main differences are that the
recloser can have up to four trips during the fault sequence, and two
different time-current curves can be used.
Sectionalizer.
A sectionalizer will count the number of times the cur-
rent drops to zero and will open after this count reaches a number that
can vary from 1 to 3. The device will not open under either load or fault
current.
8.8.6
Customer damage costs
Customer damage costs are determined by survey, PQ contract
amounts, or actual spending on mitigation. In terms of kilowatthours
unserved, estimates range from $2/kWh to more than $50/kWh. A typ-
ical cost for an average feeder with some industrial and commercial
load is $4 to $6/kWh. For approximating purposes, weighting factors
can be used to extend these costs to momentary interruptions and rms
variations assuming that the event has caused an equivalent amount
of unserved energy. Alternatively, one can use a model similar to the
example in Sec. 8.5, which basically is based on event count. Average
costs per event for a wide range of customer classes are typically stated
in the range of $3000 to $10,000.
With such high cost values, customer damage costs will drive the
planning decisions. However, these costs are very uncertain. Surveys
have been relatively consistent, but the costs are seldom “verified” with
customer payments to improve reliability or power quality. For exam-
ple, aggregating the effect on a large number of residential customers
may indicate a significant damage cost, but there is no evidence that
residential customers will pay any additional amount for improved
power quality, in spite of the surveys. There may be a loss of goodwill,
but this is a soft cost. Planning should focus on high-value customers
for which the damage costs are more verifiable.
Costs for other types of PQ disturbances are less defined. For exam-
ple, the economic effect of long-term steady-state voltage unbalance on
370
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

motors is not well known, although it likely causes premature failures.
Likewise, the costs are not well established for harmonic distortion and
transients that do not cause load tripping.
The costs may be specified per number of customers (residential,
small commercial), by energy served, or by peak demand. If the cost is
specified by peak demand, it should be weighted using a load duration
curve. For steady-state voltage, harmonic distortion, and transients,
the load variation should be included in the electrical simulations, but
this is not necessary for sustained interruptions and rms variations.
Several examples and algorithm descriptions are provided in the
EPRI Power Quality for Distribution Planning report19 showing how
the planning method can be used for making decisions about various
investments for improving the power quality. We’ve addressed only the
tip of the iceberg here but hopefully have provided some inspiration for
readers.
8.9
References
1. EPRI TR-106294-V2, An Assessment of Distribution System Power Quality. Vol. 2:
Statistical Summary Report, Electric Power Research Institute, Palo Alto, Calif.,
May 1996.
2. M. McGranaghan, A. Mansoor, A. Sundaram, R. Gilleskie, “Economic Evaluation
Procedure for Assessing Power Quality Improvement Alternatives,” Proceedings of
PQA North America, Columbus, Ohio, 1997.
3. Daniel Brooks, Bill Howe, Establishing PQ Benchmarks, E Source, Boulder, Colo.,
May 2000.
4. EPRI TR-107938, EPRI Reliability Benchmarking Methodology, EPRI, Palo Alto,
Calif., 1997.
5. IEEE Standard 1366-1998, IEEE Guide for Electric Power Distribution Reliability
Indices.
6. D. D. Sabin, T. E. Grebe, M. F. McGranaghan, A. Sundaram, “Statistical Analysis of
Voltage Dips and Interruptions—Final Results from the EPRI Distribution System
Power Quality Monitoring Survey,” Proceedings 15th International Conference on
Electricity Distribution (CIRED ’99), Nice, France, June 1999.
7. IEEE Standard 1159-1995, IEEE Recommended Practice on Monitoring Electric
Power.
8. Dan Sabin, “Indices Used to Assess RMS Variations,” presentation at the Summer
Power Meeting of IEEE PES and IAS Task Force on Standard P1546, Voltage Sag
Indices, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, 1999.
9. D. L. Brooks, R. C. Dugan, M. Waclawiak, A. Sundaram, “Indices for Assessing
Utility Distribution System RMS Variation Performance,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Delivery, PE-920-PWRD-1-04-1997.
10. IEEE Standard 519-1992, IEEE Recommended Practices and Requirements for
Harmonic Control in Electrical Power Systems.
11. A. E. Emanuel, J. Janczak, D. J. Pileggi, E. M. Gulachenski, “Distribution Feeders
with Nonlinear Loads in the NE USA: Part I. Voltage Distortion Forecast,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 10, No. 1, January 1995, pp. 340–347.
12. Barry W. Kennedy, Power Quality Primer, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2000.
13. M. F. McGranaghan, B. W. Kennedy, et. al., Power Quality Standards and
Specifications Workbook, Bonneville Power Administration, Portland, Oreg., 1994.
Power Quality Benchmarking
371
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

14. Andy Detloff, Daniel Sabin, “Power Quality Performance Component of the Special
Manufacturing Contracts between Power Provider and Customer,” Proceedings of the
ICHPQ Conference, Orlando, Fla., 2000.
15. Shmuel S. Oren, Joseph A. Doucet, “Interruption Insurance for Generation and
Distribution of Power Generation,” Journal of Regulatory Economics, Vol. 2, 1990,
pp. 5–19.
16. Joseph A. Doucet, Shmuel S. Oren, “Onsite Backup Generation and Interruption
Insurance for Electricity Distribution,” The Energy Journal, Vol. 12, No. 4, 1991, pp.
79–93.
17. Mesut E. Baran, Arthur W. Kelley, “State Estimation for Real-Time Monitoring of
Distribution Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 9, No. 3, August
1994, pp. 1601–1609.
18. T. E. McDermott, R. C. Dugan, G. J. Ball, “A Methodology for Including Power
Quality Concerns in Distribution Planning,” EPQU ‘99, Krakow, Poland, 1999.
19. EPRI TR-110346, Power Quality for Distribution Planning, EPRI, Palo Alto, CA,
April 1998.
20. M. T. Bishop, C. A. McCarthy, V. G. Rose, E. K. Stanek, “Considering Momentary and
Sustained Reliability Indices in the Design of Distribution Feeder Overcurrent
Protection,” Proceedings of 1999 IEEE T&D Conference, New Orleans, La., 1999, pp.
206–211.
21. V. Miranda, L. M. Proenca, “Probabilistic Choice vs. Risk Analysis—Conflicts and
Synthesis in Power System Planning,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 13,
No. 3, August 1998, pp. 1038–1043.
8.10
Bibliography
Sabin, D. D., Brooks, D. L., Sundaram, A., “Indices for Assessing Harmonic Distortion 
from Power Quality Measurements: Definitions and Benchmark Data.” IEEE
Transactions on Power Delivery, Vol. 14, No. 2, April 1999, pp. 489–496.
EPRI Reliability Benchmarking Application Guide for Utility/Customer PQ Indices,
EPRI, Palo Alto, Calif., 1999.
372
Chapter Eight
Power Quality Benchmarking
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

373
Distributed Generation 
and Power Quality
Many involved in power quality have also become involved in distrib-
uted generation (DG) because there is considerable overlap in the two
technologies. Therefore, it is very appropriate to include a chapter on
this topic.
As the name implies, DG uses smaller-sized generators than does the
typical central station plant. They are distributed throughout the
power system closer to the loads. The term smaller-sized can apply to a
wide range of generator sizes. Because this book is primarily concerned
with power quality of the primary and secondary distribution system,
the discussion of DG will be confined to generator sizes less than 10
MW. Generators larger than this are typically interconnected at trans-
mission voltages where the system is designed to accommodate many
generators.
The normal distribution system delivers electric energy through
wires from a single source of power to a multitude of loads. Thus, sev-
eral power quality issues arise when there are multiple sources. Will
DG improve the power quality or will it degrade the service end users
have come to expect? There are arguments supporting each side of this
question, and several of the issues that arise are examined here.
9.1
Resurgence of DG
For more than 7 decades, the norm for the electric power industry in
developed nations has been to generate power in large, centralized gen-
erating stations and to distribute the power to end users through trans-
formers, transmission lines, and distribution lines. This is often
Chapter9
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

collectively referred to as the “wires” system in DG literature. In essence,
this book describes what can go wrong with delivery of power by wires.
The original electrical power systems, consisting of relatively small
generators configured in isolated islands, used DG. That model gave
way to the present centralized system largely because of economies of
scale. Also, there was the desire to sequester electricity generation
facilities away from population centers for environmental reasons and
to locate them closer to the source of fuel and water.
The passage of the Public Utilities Regulatory Act of 1978 (PURPA)
in the United States in 1978 was intended to foster energy indepen-
dence. Tax credits were given, and power was purchased at avoided-
cost rates to spur development of renewable and energy-efficient,
low-emissions technologies. This led to a spurt in the development of
wind, solar, and geothermal generation as well as gas-fired cogenera-
tion (combined heat and power) facilities. In the mid-1990s, interest in
DG once again peaked with the development of improved DG technolo-
gies and the deregulation of the power industry allowing more power
producers to participate in the market. Also, the appearance of critical
high-technology loads requiring much greater reliability than can be
achieved by wire delivery alone has created a demand for local genera-
tion and storage to fill the gap.
Some futurists see a return to a high-tech version of the original
power system model. New technologies would allow the generation to
be as widely dispersed as the load and interconnected power grids could
be small (i.e., microgrids). The generation would be powered by renew-
able resources or clean-burning, high-efficiency technologies. Energy
distribution will be shifted from wires to pipes containing some type of
fuel, which many think will ultimately be hydrogen. How the industry
moves from its present state to this future, if it can at all, is open to
question. Recent efforts to deregulate electric power have been aimed
not only at achieving better prices for power but at enabling new tech-
nologies. However, it is by no means certain that the power industry
will evolve into DG sources. Despite the difficulties in wire-based deliv-
ery described in this book, wires are very robust compared to genera-
tion technologies. Once installed, they remain silently in service for
decades with remarkably little maintenance.
9.1.1
Perspectives on DG benefits
One key to understanding the DG issue is to recognize that there are
multiple perspectives on every relevant issue. To illustrate, we discuss
the benefits of DG from three different perspectives.
1. End-user perspective.
This is where most of the value for DG is
found today. End users who place a high value on electric power can
374
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

generally benefit greatly by having backup generation to provide
improved reliability. Others will find substantial benefit in high-effi-
ciency applications, such as combined heat and power, where the total
energy bill is reduced. End users may also be able to receive compen-
sation for making their generation capacity available to the power sys-
tem in areas where there are potential power shortages.
2. Distribution utility perspective.
The distribution utility is inter-
ested in selling power to end users through its existing network of lines
and substations. DG can be used for transmission and distribution
(T&D) capacity relief. In most cases, this application has a limited life
until the load grows sufficiently to justify building new T&D facilities.
Thus, DG serves as a hedge against uncertain load growth. It also can
serve as a hedge against high price spikes on the power market (if per-
mitted by regulatory agencies).
3. Commercial power producer perspective.
Those looking at DG
from this perspective are mainly interested in selling power or ancil-
lary services into the area power market. In the sense that DG is dis-
cussed here, most units are too small to bid individually in the power
markets. Commercial aggregators will bid the capacities of several
units. The DG may be directly interconnected into the grid or simply
serve the load off-grid. The latter avoids many of the problems associ-
ated with interconnection but does not allow the full capacity of the DG
to be utilized.
Disadvantages of DG.
There are also different perspectives on the dis-
advantages of DG. Utilities are concerned with power quality issues,
and a great deal of the remainder of this chapter is devoted to that con-
cern. End users should be mainly concerned about costs and mainte-
nance. Do end users really want to operate generators? Will electricity
actually cost less and be more reliable? Will power markets continue to
be favorable toward DG? There are many unanswered questions.
However, it seems likely that the amount of DG interconnected with
the utility system will continue to increase for the foreseeable future.
9.1.2
Perspectives on interconnection
There are also opposing perspectives on the issue of interconnecting
DG to the utility system. This is the source of much controversy in
efforts to establish industry standards for interconnection. Figures 9.1
and 9.2 illustrate the views of the two key opposing positions.
Figure 9.1 depicts the viewpoint of end users and DG owners who want
to interconnect to extract one or more of the benefits previously men-
tioned. Drawings like this can be found in many different publications
promoting the use of DG. The implied message related to power quality
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
375
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

is that the DG is small compared to the grid. This group often has the
view that the grid is a massive entity too large to be affected by their rel-
atively small generator. For this reason, many have a difficult time
understanding why utilities balk at interconnecting and view the utility
requirements simply as obstructionist and designed to avoid competition.
Another aspect of the end-user viewpoint that is not captured in this
drawing is that despite the large mass of the grid, it is viewed as unre-
liable and providing “dirty” power. DG proponent literature often por-
trays DG as improving the reliability of the system (including the grid)
and providing better-quality power.
The perspective on interconnected DG of typical utility distribution
engineers, most of whom are very conservative in their approach to
planning and operations, is captured in Fig. 9.2. The size of customer-
owned DG is magnified to appear much larger than its actual size, and
it produces dirty power. It is also a little off-center in its design, sug-
gesting that it is not built and maintained as well as utility equipment.
376
Chapter Nine
THE GRID
LOAD
GEN
Figure 9.1
End-user and genera-
tor owner perspectives on inter-
connection.
LOAD
GEN
Figure 9.2
Distribution planner perspective on interconnection.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

There are elements of truth to each of these positions. The intent in
this book is not to take sides in this debate but to present the issues as
fairly as possible while pointing out how to solve problems related to
power quality.
9.2
DG Technologies
The emphasis of this chapter is on the power aspects of DG, and only a
cursory description of the relevant issue with the technologies will be
given. Readers are referred to Refs. 1 and 2 for more details. Also, the
Internet contains a multitude of resources on DG. A word of caution: As
with all things on the Internet, it is good to maintain a healthy skepti-
cism of any material found there. Proponents and marketers for par-
ticular technologies have a way of making things seem very attractive
while neglecting to inform the reader of major pitfalls.
9.2.1
Reciprocating engine genset
The most commonly applied DG technology is the reciprocating engine-
generator set. A typical unit is shown in Fig. 9.3. This technology is gen-
erally the least expensive DG technology, often by a factor of 2.
Reciprocating gas or diesel engines are mature technologies and are
readily available.
Utilities currently favor mobile gensets mounted on trailers so that
they can be moved to sites where they are needed. A common applica-
tion is to provide support for the transmission and distribution system
in emergencies. The units are placed in substations and interconnected
to the grid through transformers that typically step up the voltage from
the 480 V produced by the generators. Manufacturers of these units
have geared up production in recent years to meet demands to relieve
severe grid constraints that have occurred in some areas. One side
effect of this is that the cost of the units has dropped, widening the cost
gap between this technology and the next least costly option, which is
generally some sort of combustion turbine.
Diesel gensets are quite popular with end users for backup power.
One of the disadvantages of this technology is high NOx and SOx emis-
sions. This severely limits the number of hours the units, particularly
diesels, may operate each year to perhaps as few as 150. Thus, the main
applications will be for peaking generation and emergency backup.
Natural gas–fired engines produce fewer emissions and can gener-
ally be operated several thousand hours each year. Thus, they are pop-
ular in combined heat and power cogeneration applications in schools,
government, and commercial buildings where they operate at least for
the business day.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
377
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The unit shown in Fig. 9.3 has a synchronous alternator, which
would be the most common configuration for standby and utility grid
support applications. However, it is also common to find reciprocating
engines with induction generators. This is particularly true for cogen-
eration applications of less than 300 kW because it is often simpler to
meet interconnection requirements with induction machines that are
not likely to support islands.
Reciprocating engine gensets have consistent performance charac-
teristics over a wide range of environmental conditions with efficien-
cies in the range of 35 to 40 percent. They are less sensitive to ambient
conditions than combustion turbines whose power efficiency declines
considerably as the outside air temperature rises. However, the waste
heat from a combustion turbine is at a much higher temperature than
that from a reciprocating engine. Thus, turbines are generally the
choice for combined heat and power applications that require process
steam.
9.2.2
Combustion (gas) turbines
Combustion turbines commonly used in cogeneration applications
interconnected to the distribution system generally range in size from
1 to 10 MW. The turbines commonly turn at speeds of 8000 to 12,000
378
Chapter Nine
Figure 9.3
Diesel reciprocating engine genset. (Courtesy of Cummins Inc.)
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

rpm and are geared down to the speed required by the synchronous
alternator (typically 1800 or 3600 rpm for 60-Hz systems). Units of 10
MW or larger in size, in either simple- or combined-cycle configura-
tions, are commonly found connected to the transmission grid. Natural
gas is a common fuel, although various liquid fuels may also be used.
One new combustion turbine technology—the microturbine—has
been responsible for some of the renewed interest in DG. Figure 9.4
shows a microturbine being employed in a combined heat and power
application with the heat exchanger shown on the left. One of the major
advantages of this technology is that installations are clean and com-
pact. This allows deployment near living and working areas, although
there may be some issues with the high-pitched turbine noise in some
environments.
The only moving part in a microturbine is a one-piece turbine with a
permanent-magnet rotor. The assembly spins at speeds typically rang-
ing from 10,000 to 100,000 rpm. The alternator output is rectified to
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
379
Figure 9.4
Microturbine in a combined heat and power installation.
(Courtesy of Capstone Turbine Corporation.)
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

direct current immediately and fed into an inverter that interfaces
with the ac electric power system. Thus, the characteristic of the micro-
turbine that is of interest to power quality engineers is the response of
the inverter to system disturbances.
Microturbines are produced in sizes of 30 to 75 kW, which are most
commonly matched to small commercial loads. They may be paralleled
in packs to achieve higher ratings. Larger sizes of approximately 300
to 400 kW are also becoming available and are sometimes called mini-
turbines.
Microturbine electricity generation efficiency is often claimed to be
as high as 30 percent, but 25 percent is a more likely value. Because
of its low efficiency, it is not generally cost competitive for electricity
generation alone. However, when teamed with an appropriate ther-
mal load, net energy efficiencies exceeding 60 percent can be
achieved. This technology is best suited for combined heat and power
applications in small- to medium-sized commercial and industrial
facilities.
There are niche applications where microturbines are used strictly
for electricity generation. Because microturbines have compact pack-
aging and low emissions, they make convenient and environmentally
friendly standby and peaking generators. They are also used in some
base load applications; have the ability to accept a wide variety and
quality of fuels; and are a convenient means to extract energy from bio-
mass gas, flare gas, or natural gas that is not economical to transport
to pipelines.
9.2.3
Fuel cells
Another exciting DG technology is the fuel cell (Fig. 9.5). This tech-
nology also occupies a relatively small footprint, is very quiet, and has
virtually no harmful emissions during operation. Fuel cells are effi-
cient electricity generators and may be employed in combined heat
and power applications to achieve among the very best possible
energy-conversion efficiencies. Those who see the future energy econ-
omy based on hydrogen see the fuel cell as the dominant energy-con-
version technology.
A fuel cell is basically a battery powered by an electrochemical
process based on the conversion of hydrogen. It produces dc voltage,
and an inverter is required for interfacing to the ac power system.
The chief drawback to fuel cells at present is cost. Fuel cell technolo-
gies are on the order of 10 times more expensive than reciprocating
gensets. This will limit the implementation of fuel cells for electricity
production to niche applications until there is a price breakthrough.
Many expect this breakthrough to occur when the fuel cell is adopted
by the automotive industry.
380
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

9.2.4
Wind turbines
Wind generation capacity has been increasing rapidly and has become
cost competitive with other means of generation in some regions. A
common implementation is to group a number of wind turbines rang-
ing in size from 700 to 1200 kW each into a “wind farm” having a total
maximum capacity range of 200 to 500 MW. One example is shown in
Fig. 9.6. Such large farms are interconnected to the transmission sys-
tem rather than the distribution system. However, smaller farms of 6
to 8 MW have been proposed for applications such as ski resorts, and
they would be connected directly to distribution feeders.
The chief power quality issue associated with wind generation is
voltage regulation. Wind generation tends to be located in sparsely pop-
ulated areas where the electrical system is weak relative to the gener-
ation capacity. This results in voltage variations that are difficult to
manage. Thus, it is sometimes impossible to serve loads from the same
feeder that serves a wind farm.
There are three main classes of generator technologies used for the
electrical system interface for wind turbines:
1. Conventional squirrel-cage induction machines or wound-rotor induc-
tion machines. These frequently are supplemented by switched capac-
itors to compensate for reactive power needs.
2. Doubly fed wound-rotor induction machines that employ power con-
verters to control the rotor current to provide reactive power control.
3. Non–power frequency generation that requires an inverter interface.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
381
Figure 9.5
A fuel cell producing electricity and heat for a hospital. (Courtesy of
International Fuel Cells, LLC.)
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

9.2.5
Photovoltaic systems
The recent power shortages in some states and the passage of net
metering legislation has spurred the installation of rooftop photo-
voltaic solar systems. Figure 9.7 shows a large system on a commercial
building in California. A typical size for a residential unit would be
between 2 and 6 kW. Once installed, the incremental cost of electricity
is very low with the source of energy being essentially free while it is
available. However, the first cost is very substantial even with buy-
down incentives from government programs. Installed costs currently
range from $5000 to $20,000/kW. Despite this high cost, photovoltaic
solar technology is favored by many environmentalists and installed
capacity can be expected to continue growing.
Photovoltaic solar systems generate dc power while the sun is shin-
ing on them and are interfaced to the utility system through inverters.
Some systems do not have the capability to operate stand-alone—the
inverters operate only in the utility-interactive mode and require the
presence of the grid.
382
Chapter Nine
Figure 9.6
Wind farm in the midwestern United States. (Courtesy of Enron Corp.)
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

9.3
Interface to the Utility System
The primary concern here is the impact of DG on the distribution sys-
tem power quality. While the energy conversion technology may play
some role in the power quality, most power quality issues relate to the
type of electrical system interface.
Some notable exceptions include:
1. The power variation from renewable sources such as wind and solar
can cause voltage fluctuations.
2. Some fuel cells and microturbines do not follow step changes in load
well and must be supplemented with battery or flywheel storage to
achieve the improved reliability expected from standby power
applications.
3. Misfiring of reciprocating engines can lead to a persistent and irri-
tating type of flicker, particularly if it is magnified by the response
of the power system.
The main types of electrical system interfaces are
1. Synchronous machines
2. Asynchronous (induction) machines
3. Electronic power inverters
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
383
Figure 9.7
Rooftop photovoltaic solar system. (Courtesy of PowerLight
Corporation.)
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The key power quality issues for each type of interface are described in
Secs. 9.3.1 to 9.3.3.
9.3.1
Synchronous machines
Even though synchronous machines use old technology, are common on
power systems, and are well understood, there are some concerns when
they are applied in grid parallel DG applications. They are the primary
type of electric machine used in backup generation applications. With
proper field and governor control, the machine can follow any load
within its design capability. The inherent inertia allows it to be toler-
ant of step-load changes. While this is good for backup power, it is the
source of much concern to utility distribution engineers because this
technology can easily sustain inadvertent islands that could occur
when the utility feeder breaker opens. It also can feed faults and pos-
sibly interfere with utility overcurrent protection.
Unless the machines are large relative to system capacity, intercon-
nected synchronous generators on distribution systems are usually
operated with a constant power factor or constant var exciter control.
For one thing, small DG does not have sufficient capacity to regulate
the voltage while interconnected. Attempting to do so would generally
result in the exciter going to either of the two extremes. Secondly, this
avoids having the voltage controls of several small machines competing
with each other and the utility voltage regulation scheme. A third rea-
son this is done is to reduce the chances that an inadvertent island will
be sustained. A nearly exact match of the load at the time of separation
would have to exist for the island to escape detection.
It is possible for a synchronous machine that is large relative to the
capacity of the system at the PCC to regulate the utility system volt-
age. This can be a power quality advantage in certain weak systems.
However, this type of system should be carefully studied and coordi-
nated with the utility system protection and voltage regulation equip-
ment. It would be possible to permit only one generator on each
substation bus to operate in this fashion without adding elaborate con-
trols. The generation will likely take over voltage regulation and can
drive voltage regulators to undesirable tap positions. Conversely, util-
ity voltage regulators can drive the generator exciter to undesirable set
points. To ensure detection of utility-side faults when the intercon-
nected generator is being operated under automatic voltage control,
many utilities will require a direct transfer trip between the utility
breaker and the generation interconnection breaker.
One aspect of synchronous generators that is often overlooked is
their impedance. Compared to the utility electrical power system, gen-
erators sized for typical backup power purposes have high impedances.
The subtransient reactance Xd″, which is seen by harmonics, is often
384
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

about 15 percent of the machine’s rating. The transient reactance, Xd′,
which governs much of the fault contribution, might be around 25 per-
cent. The synchronous reactance Xd is generally over 100 percent. In
contrast, the impedance of the power system seen from the main load
bus is generally only 5 to 6 percent of the service transformer rating,
which is normally larger than the machine rating. Thus, end users
expecting a relatively seamless transfer from interconnected operation
to isolated backup operation are often disappointed. Some actual exam-
ples of unexpected consequences are
1. The harmonic voltage distortion increases to intolerable levels when
the generator is attempting to supply adjustable-speed-drive loads.
2. There is not enough fault current to trip breakers or blow fuses that
were sized based on the power system contribution.
3. The voltage sag when elevator motors are being started causes flu-
orescent lamps to extinguish.
Generators must be sized considerably larger than the load to achieve
satisfactory power quality in isolated operation.
Another aspect that is often overlooked is that the voltage waveform
produced by a synchronous machine is not perfect. In certain designs,
there are considerable third-harmonic currents in the voltage. Utility
central station generation may also have this imperfection, but the
delta winding of the unit step-up transformer blocks the flow of this
harmonic. The service transformer connection for many potential end-
user DG locations is not configured to do this and will result in high
third-harmonic currents flowing in the generator and, possibly, onto
the utility system. This is discussed is greater detail in Sec. 9.5. The net
result is that synchronous generators for grid parallel DG applications
should generally be designed with a 2/3 winding pitch to minimize the
third-harmonic component. Otherwise, special attention must be given
to the interface transformer connection, or additional equipment such
as a neutral reactor and shorting switch must be installed.
9.3.2
Asynchronous (induction) machines
In many ways, it is simple to interface induction machines to the util-
ity system. Induction generators are induction motors that are driven
slightly faster than synchronous speed. They require another source to
provide excitation, which greatly reduces the chances of inadvertent
islanding. No special synchronizing equipment is necessary. In fact, if
the capacity of the electrical power system permits, induction genera-
tors can be started across the line. For weaker systems, the prime
mover is started and brought to near-synchronous speed before the
machine is interconnected. There will be an inrush transient upon clo-
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
385
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

sure, but this would be relatively minor in comparison to starting from
a standstill across the line.
The requirements for operating an induction generator are essentially
the same as for operating an induction motor of the same size. The chief
issue is that a simple induction generator requires reactive power (vars)
to excite the machine from the power system to which it is connected.
Occasionally, this is an advantage when there are high-voltage problems,
but more commonly there will be low-voltage problems in induction gen-
erator applications. The usual fix is to add power factor correction capac-
itors to supply the reactive power locally. While this works well most of
the time, it can bring about another set of power quality problems.
One of the problems is that the capacitor bank will yield resonances
that coincide with harmonics produced in the same facility. This can
bring about the problems described in Chaps. 5 and 6.
Another issue is self-excitation. An induction generator that is sud-
denly isolated on a capacitor bank can continue to generate for some
period of time. This is an unregulated voltage and will likely deviate
outside the normal range quickly and be detected. However, this situa-
tion can often result in a ferroresonant condition with damaging volt-
ages.3 Induction generators that can become isolated on capacitor
banks and load that is less than 3 times rated power are usually
required to have instantaneous overvoltage relaying.
One myth surrounding induction generators is that they do not feed
into utility-side faults. Textbook examples typically show the current
contribution into a fault from an induction machine dying out in 1.5
cycles. While this is true for three-phase faults near the machine ter-
minals that collapse the terminal phase voltages, there are not many
faults like this on a utility distribution system. Most are SLG faults,
and the voltage on the faulted phase does not collapse to zero (see the
examples in Chap. 3). In fact, generators served by delta-wye trans-
formers may detect very little disturbance in the voltage. There are
many complex dynamics occurring within the machine during unbal-
anced faults, and a detailed electromagnetic transients analysis is
needed to compute them precisely. A common rule of thumb is that if
the voltage supplying the induction machine remains higher than 60
percent, assume that it will continue to feed into the fault as if it were
a synchronous machine. This voltage level is sufficient to maintain
excitation levels within the machine.
9.3.3
Electronic power inverters
All DG technologies that generate either dc or non–power frequency ac
must use an electronic power inverter to interface with the electrical
power system.
386
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The early thyristor-based, line-commutated inverters quickly devel-
oped a reputation for being undesirable on the power system. In fact,
the development of much of the harmonics analysis technology
described in Chaps. 5 and 6 was triggered by proposals to install hun-
dreds of rooftop photovoltaic solar arrays with line-commutated invert-
ers.4 These inverters produced harmonic currents in similar proportion
to loads with traditional thyristor-based converters. Besides contribut-
ing to the distortion on the feeders, one fear was that this type of DG
would produce a significant amount of power at the harmonic frequen-
cies. Such power does little more than heat up wires.
To achieve better control and to avoid harmonics problems, the
inverter technology has changed to switched, pulse-width modulated
technologies. This has resulted in a more friendly interface to the elec-
trical power system.
Figure 9.8 shows the basic components of a utility interactive
inverter that meets the requirements of IEEE Standard 929-2000.5
Direct current is supplied on the left side of the diagram either from a
conversion technology that produces direct current directly or from the
rectification of ac generator output. Variations of this type of inverter
are commonly employed on fuel cells, microturbines, photovoltaic solar
systems, and some wind turbines.
The dc voltage is switched at a very high rate with an insulated gate
bipolar transistor (IGBT) switch to create a sinusoid voltage or current
of power frequency. The switching frequency is typically on the order of
50 to 100 times the power frequency. The filter on the output attenu-
ates these high-frequency components to a degree that they are usually
negligible. However, resonant conditions on the power system can
sometimes make these high frequencies noticeable. The largest low-
order harmonic (usually, the fifth) is generally less than 3 percent, and
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
387
+
DC
AC SWITCH
FILTER
VOLTAGE
CURRENT
SWITCHING
CONTROL
Figure 9.8
Simplified schematic diagram of a modern switching inverter.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the others are often negligible. The total harmonic distortion limit is 5
percent, based on the requirements of IEEE Standard 519-1992.
Occasionally, some inverters will exceed these limits under specific con-
ditions. Manufacturers may skimp on filtering, or there may be a flaw
in the switch control algorithm. Nevertheless, the harmonic issue with
modern inverters is certainly much less of a concern than those based
on older technologies.
While interconnected to the utility, commonly applied inverters basi-
cally attempt to generate a sine-wave current that follows the voltage
waveform. Thus, they would produce power at unity power factor. It is
possible to program other strategies into the switching control, but the
unity power factor strategy is the simplest and most common. Also, it
allows the full current-carrying capability of the switch to be used for
delivering active power (watts). If the inverter has stand-alone capabil-
ity, the control objective would change to producing a sinusoidal voltage
waveform at power frequency and the current would follow the load.
One of the advantages of such an inverter for DG applications is that
it can be switched off very quickly when trouble is detected. There may
be some lag in determining that something has gone wrong, particu-
larly if there are synchronous machines with substantial inertia main-
taining the voltage on the system. When a disturbance requiring
disconnection is detected, the switching simply ceases. Inverters typi-
cally exhibit very little inertia and changes can take place in millisec-
onds. Rotating machines may require several cycles to respond. It may
be possible to reclose out of phase on inverters without damage pro-
vided current surge limits in the semiconductor switches are not
exceeded. Thus, reconnection and resynchronization are less of an
issue than with synchronous machines.
The ability of inverters to feed utility-side faults is usually limited by
the maximum current capability of the IGBT switches. Analysts com-
monly assume that the current will be limited to 2 times the rated out-
put of the inverter. Of course, once the current reaches these values,
the inverter will likely assume a fault and cease operation for a prede-
termined time. This can be an advantage for utility interactive opera-
tion but can also be a disadvantage for applications requiring a certain
amount of fault current to trip relays.
Utility interactive inverters compliant with IEEE Standard 929-
2000 also have a destabilizing signal that is constantly trying to change
the frequency of the control. The purpose is to help ensure that inad-
vertent islands are promptly detected. While interconnected with the
utility, the strength of the electrical power system overpowers this ten-
dency toward destabilization. If the inverter system is suddenly iso-
lated on load, the frequency will quickly deviate, allowing it to be
detected both within the control and by external relays.
388
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

9.4
Power Quality Issues
The main power quality issues affected by DG are
1. Sustained interruptions.
This is the traditional reliability area.
Many generators are designed to provide backup power to the load
in case of power interruption. However, DG has the potential to
increase the number of interruptions in some cases.
2. Voltage regulation.
This is often the most limiting factor for how
much DG can be accommodated on a distribution feeder without
making changes.
3. Harmonics.
There are harmonics concerns with both rotating
machines and inverters, although concern with inverters is less with
modern technologies.
4. Voltage sags.
This a special case because DG may or may not help.
Each of these issues is discussed in turn.
9.4.1
Sustained interruptions
Much of the DG that is already in place was installed as backup gen-
eration. The most common technology used for backup generation is
diesel gensets. The bulk of the capacity of this form of DG can be real-
ized simply by transferring the load to the backup system. However,
there will be additional power that can be extracted by paralleling with
the power system. Many DG installations will operate with better
power quality while paralleled with the utility system because of its
large capacity. However, not all backup DG can be paralleled without
great expense.
Not all DG technologies are capable of significant improvements in
reliability. To achieve improvement, the DG must be capable of serving
the load when the utility system cannot.
For example, a homeowner may install a rooftop photovoltaic solar
system with the expectation of being able to ride through rotating
blackouts. Unfortunately, the less costly systems do not have the
proper inverter and storage capacity to operate stand-alone. Therefore,
there is no improvement in reliability.
Utilities may achieve improved reliability by employing DG to cover
contingencies when part of the delivery system is out of service. In this
case, the DG does not serve all the load, but only enough to cover for the
capacity that is out of service. This can allow deferral of major con-
struction expenses for a few years. The downside is that reliance on this
scheme for too many years can ultimately lead to worse reliability. The
load growth will overtake the base capacity of the system, requiring load
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
389
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

shedding during peak load conditions or resulting in the inability to
operate the system at acceptable voltage after a fault.
9.4.2
Voltage regulation
It may initially seem that DG should be able to improve the voltage reg-
ulation on a feeder. Generator controls are much faster and smoother
than conventional tap-changing transformers and switched capacitor
banks. With careful engineering, this can be accomplished with suffi-
ciently large DG. However, there are many problems associated with
voltage regulation. In cases where the DG is located relatively far from
the substation for the size of DG, voltage regulation issues are often the
most limiting for being able to accommodate the DG without changes
to the utility system.
It should first be recognized that some technologies are unsuitable
for regulating voltages. This is the case for simple induction machines
and for most utility interactive inverters that produce no reactive
power. Secondly, most utilities do not want the DG to attempt to regu-
late the voltage because that would interfere with utility voltage regu-
lation equipment and increase the chances of supporting an island.
Multiple DG would interfere with each other. Finally, small DG is sim-
ply not powerful enough to regulate the voltage and will be dominated
by the daily voltage changes on the utility system. Small DG is almost
universally required to interconnect with a fixed power factor or fixed
reactive power control.
Large DG greater than 30 percent of the feeder capacity that is set to
regulate the voltage will often require special communications and con-
trol to work properly with the utility voltage-regulating equipment.
One common occurrence is that the DG will take over the voltage-reg-
ulating duties and drive the substation load tap changer (LTC) into a
significant bucking position as the load cycles up and down. This
results in a problem when the DG suddenly disconnects, as it would for
a fault. The voltage is then too low to support the load and takes a
minute or more to recover. One solution is to establish a control scheme
that locks the LTC at a preselected tap when the generator is operat-
ing and interconnected.
Large voltage changes are also possible if there were a significant
penetration of dispersed, smaller DG producing a constant power fac-
tor. Suddenly connecting or disconnecting such generation can result
in a relatively large voltage change that will persist until recognized
by the utility voltage-regulating system. This could be a few minutes,
so the change should be no more than about 5 percent. One condition
that might give rise to this would be fault clearing on the utility sys-
tem. All the generation would disconnect when the fault occurs, wait 5
min, and then reconnect. Customers would first see low voltage for a
390
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

minute, or so, followed 5 min later by high voltages. Options for deal-
ing with this include faster tap-changing voltage regulators and
requiring the load to be disconnected whenever the DG is forced off
due to a disturbance. There is less voltage excursion when the DG is
operating near unity power factor. However, there may be some
instances where it will be advantageous in normal operation to have
the DG produce reactive power.
9.4.3
Harmonics
There are many who still associate DG with bad experiences with har-
monics from electronic power converters. If thyristor-based, line-com-
mutated inverters were still the norm, this would be a large problem.
Fortunately, the technologies requiring inverters have adopted the
switching inverters like the one described previously in this chapter.
This has eliminated the bulk of the harmonics problems from these
technologies.
One problem that occurs infrequently arises when a switching
inverter is installed in a system that is resonant at frequencies pro-
duced by the switching process. The symptom is usually high-fre-
quency hash appearing on the voltage waveform. The usual power
quality complaint, if any, is that clocks supplied by this voltage run fast
at times. This problem is generally solved by adding a capacitor to the
bus that is of sufficient size to shunt off the high-frequency components
without causing additional resonances.
Harmonics from rotating machines are not always negligible, partic-
ularly in grid parallel operation. The utility power system acts as a
short circuit to zero-sequence triplen harmonics in the voltage, which
can result in surprisingly high currents. For grounded wye-wye or
delta-wye service transformers, only synchronous machines with 2/3
pitch can be paralleled without special provisions to limit neutral cur-
rent. For service transformer connections with a delta-connected wind-
ing on the DG side, nearly any type of three-phase alternator can be
paralleled without this harmonic problem.
9.4.4
Voltage sags
The most common power quality problem is a voltage sag, but the abil-
ity of DG to help alleviate sags is very dependent on the type of gener-
ation technology and the interconnection location. Figure 9.9
illustrates a case in which DG is interconnected on the load side of the
service transformer. During a voltage sag, DG might act to counter the
sag. Large rotating machines can help support the voltage magnitudes
and phase relationships. Although not a normal feature, it is conceiv-
able to control an inverter to counteract voltage excursions.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
391
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The DG influence on sags at its own load bus is aided by the imped-
ance of the service transformer, which provides some isolation from the
source of the sag on the utility system. However, this impedance hin-
ders the ability of the DG to provide any relief to other loads on the
same feeder. DG larger than 1 MW will often be required to have its
own service transformer. The point of common coupling with any load
is the primary distribution system. Therefore, it is not likely that DG
connected in this manner will have any impact on the voltage sag char-
acteristic seen by other loads served from the feeder.
9.5
Operating Conflicts
Deploying generation along utility distribution systems naturally cre-
ates some conflicts because the design of the system assumes only one
source of power.6 A certain amount of generation can be accommodated
without making any changes. At some point, the conflicts will be too
great and changes must be made.
In this section, several of the operating conflicts that can result in
power quality problems are described.
9.5.1
Utility fault-clearing requirements
Figure 9.10 shows the key components of the overcurrent protection
system of a radial feeder.7 The lowest-level component is the lateral
fuse, and the other devices (reclosers and breakers) are designed to con-
form to the fuse characteristic. There will frequently be two to four
feeders off the same substation bus. This design is based mostly on eco-
nomic concerns. This is the least costly protection scheme that is able
392
Chapter Nine
Figure 9.9
DG may help reduce voltage sags on
local facility bus, but impedance of interconnection
transformer inhibits any impact on adjacent utility
customers.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

to achieve acceptable reliability for distributing the power. One essen-
tial characteristic is that only one device has to operate to clear and iso-
late a short circuit, and local intelligence can accomplish the task
satisfactorily. In contrast, faults on the transmission system, which
easily handles generation, usually require at least two breakers to
operate and local intelligence is insufficient in some cases.
In essence, this design is the source of most of the conflicts for inter-
connecting DG with the utility distribution system. Because there is too
much infrastructure in place to consider a totally different distribution
system design to better accommodate DG, the DG must adapt to the way
the utility system works. With only one utility device operating to clear
a fault, all other DG devices must independently detect the fault and sep-
arate to allow the utility protection system to complete the clearing and
isolation process. This is not always simple to do from the information
that can be sensed at the generator. The remainder of this section
describes some of the difficulties that occur. Refer to Chap. 3 for more
details on the fault-clearing process on radial distribution systems.
9.5.2
Reclosing
Reclosing utility breakers after a fault is a very common practice, par-
ticularly throughout North America. Most of the distribution lines are
overhead, and it is common to have temporary faults. Once the current
is interrupted and the arc dispersed, the line insulation is restored.
Reclosing enables the power to be restored to most of the customers
within seconds.
Reclosing presents two special problems with respect to DG:
1. DG must disconnect early in the reclose interval to allow time for
the arc to dissipate so that the reclose will be successful.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
393
FEEDERS
BREAKER
RECLOSER
FUSED LATERALS
Only this device must operate
to clear fault
Figure 9.10
Typical overcurrent protection of a utility distribution
feeder.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2. Reclosing on DG, particularly those systems using rotating machine
technologies, can cause damage to the generator or prime mover.
Figure 9.11 illustrates the reclose interval between the first two oper-
ations of the utility breaker (this represents an unsuccessful reclose
because the fault is still present). The DG relaying must be able to
detect the presence of the fault followed by the opening of the utility
fault interrupter so that it can disconnect early in the reclose interval
as shown.
Normally, this detection and disconnection process should be
straightforward. However, some transformer connections make it diffi-
cult to detect certain faults, which could delay disconnection.
A greater complicating factor is the use of instantaneous reclosing by
many utilities. This is used for the first reclose interval for the purpose
of improving power quality to sensitive customers. The blinking clock
problem can be largely averted, and many other types of loads can ride
through this brief dead time. The interval for instantaneous reclose is
nominally 0.5 s, but can be as fast as 0.2 s. This is in the range of relay-
ing and opening times for some DG breakers. Thus, instantaneous
reclose is very likely to be incompatible with DG. It greatly increases
the probability that some DG will still be connected when the reclose
occurs or that the fault did not have enough time to clear, resulting in
an unsuccessful reclose.
A reclose interval of at least 1.0 s is safer when there is DG on the
feeder. Many utilities use 2.0 or 5.0 s for the first reclose interval when
DG is installed. This minimizes the risk that the DG will not discon-
nect in time. If it is deemed necessary to maintain the instantaneous
reclose, it is generally necessary to employ direct transfer trip so that
the DG breaker is tripped simultaneously with the utility breaker.
394
Chapter Nine
Reclose
Interval
DG Must Disconnect Here
Figure 9.11
DG must disconnect early in the first reclose interval to
allow the fault-clearing process to proceed.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

This can be a very expensive proposition for smaller DG installations.
Thus, for some distribution systems it will be necessary to compromise
one aspect of power quality to better accommodate significant
amounts of DG.
9.5.3
Interference with relaying
Three of the more common cases where DG can interfere with the over-
current protection relaying on distribution feeders will be examined
here:
1. Reduction of reach
2. Sympathetic tripping of feeder breakers
3. Defeat of fuse saving
Figure 9.12 illustrates the reduction-of-reach concept. Each over-
current relay device has an assigned zone of protection that is deter-
mined by its minimum pickup value. Some refer to this generically
as the “reach” of the relay. DG infeed can reduce the current that the
relay sees, thereby shortening its reach. When the total DG capac-
ity increases to a certain amount, the infeed into faults can desensi-
tize the relays and leave remote sections of the feeder unprotected.
A low-current (high-impedance) fault near the end of the feeder is
more likely to go undetected until it does sufficient damage to
develop into a major fault. The power quality consequences of this
are that voltage sags will be prolonged for some customers and the
additional fault damage will eventually lead to more sustained
interruptions.
This issue can be a particular problem for peaking generation located
near the end of the feeder. This generation is on at peak load level
where the overcurrent relaying would normally be very sensitive to a
high-impedance fault. The DG infeed has the potential to mask many
faults that would otherwise be detected.
Solutions include:
1. Decrease the relay minimum pickup current to increase the zone.
This may not be practical for ground relays that are already set to a
very sensitive level.
2. Add a line recloser to create another protection zone that extends far
past the end of the feeder.
3. Use a transformer connection that minimizes DG contribution to
ground faults, since high-impedance faults are likely to be ground
faults.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
395
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Sympathetic tripping describes a condition where a breaker that
does not see fault current trips “in sympathy” with the breaker that
did. The most common circuit condition on utility distribution feeders
is backfeed into a ground fault. For the situation shown in Fig. 9.13, the
source of the backfeed current is the DG. Most utility feeder breakers
do not have directional sensing. Therefore, the ground relay sees the
DG contribution as a fault and trips the breaker needlessly. This situ-
ation is exacerbated if the service transformer for the DG has a
grounded wye-delta connection.
The main solution to this problem is to use directional overcurrent
relaying. If appropriate potential transformers are not already present,
this could end up being an expensive alteration. Since the DG contri-
bution in breaker B is likely to be much lower than the fault current
through breaker A, it may be possible to achieve coordination with the
appropriate time-delay characteristic or by raising the instantaneous
(or fast) trip pickup past the amount of DG infeed.
The power quality impact of the sympathetic tripping is that many
customers are interrupted needlessly. The DG is also forced off-line,
which could be a problem for the DG owner. There could be impacts
from the solutions as well. By slowing the ground trip, there will be
more arcing damage to lines and through-fault duty on transformers.
This could eventually lead to increased failures.
Fuse saving is commonly practiced in utility overcurrent protection
schemes, particularly in more rural regions. The desired sequence for
the situation depicted in Fig. 9.14 is for the recloser R to operate before
the lateral fuse has a chance to blow. If the fault is temporary, the arc
will extinguish and service will be restored upon the subsequent
reclose, which normally takes place within 1 or 2 s. This saves the cost
of sending a line crew to change the fuse and improves the reliability of
customers served on the fused lateral.
396
Chapter Nine
UTILITY BREAKER
NORMAL ZONE OF
PROTECTION
REDUCED SOURCE
CURRENT
CONTRIBUTION
GENERATOR
INFEED
FAULT
REDUCED ZONE
OF PROTECTION
Figure 9.12
Infeed from DG can reduce the reach of the relay.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Fuse-saving action is a “horse race” in the best of circumstances. It is
a challenge for the mechanical recloser to detect the fault and operate
fast enough to prevent damage to the fuse element. DG infeed adds to
the current in the fuse and makes this race even tighter. At some
amount of DG capacity that is capable of feeding the fault, it will no
longer be possible to save the fuse.
This phenomenon limits the amount of synchronous machine DG
that can be accommodated without making changes to the system.
Fuse-saving coordination fails for about the same level of generation
that causes voltage regulation problems.
Solutions include:
1. Increase the size of the lateral fuses. All fused cutouts in the zone
would have to be changed, which could be quite expensive.
2. Choose to simply abandon fuse saving, particularly if the DG is only
connected intermittently.
3. Require DG to have transformer connections that do not feed single-
line-to-ground faults.
The power quality impacts of this are mixed. While the utility gener-
ally views fuse saving as an improvement in power quality, customers
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
397
Figure 9.13
Sympathetic tripping
of feeder breaker (B) for DG infeed
into faults on other feeders.
Figure 9.14
Infeed from DG can
defeat fuse saving.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tend to view the short blink as poor service. Therefore, many utilities
have already abandoned fuse saving in many areas.
9.5.4
Voltage regulation issues
While there is great concern for various dynamics and transients issues
that are difficult to analyze, voltage regulation issues are more likely
to occur and cause interconnection problems. Figure 9.15 illustrates
one voltage regulation problem that can arise when the total DG capac-
ity on a feeder becomes significant. This problem is a consequence of
the requirement to disconnect all DG when a fault occurs.
Figure 9.15a shows the voltage profile along the feeder prior to the
fault occurring. The intent of the voltage regulation scheme is to keep
the voltage magnitude between the two limits shown. In this case, the
DG helps keep the voltage above the minimum and, in fact, is large
enough to give a slight voltage rise toward the end of the feeder.
When the fault occurs, the DG disconnects and may remain discon-
nected for up to 5 min. The breaker recloses within a few seconds,
resulting in the condition shown in Fig. 9.15b. The load is now too great
for the feeder and the present settings of the voltage regulation devices.
398
Chapter Nine
VOLTAGE PROFILE
BEFORE FAULT
VOLTAGE PROFILE
AFTER RECLOSE
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.15
Voltage profile change when DG is forced off to clear faults.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Therefore, the voltage at the end of the feeder sags below the minimum
and will remain low until voltage regulation equipment can react. This
can be the better part of a minute or longer, which increases the risk of
damage to load equipment due to excessively low voltages.
Of course, this assumes that the voltage regulation devices are not
already at the maximum tap position. Utility planners will often point
out that this is one of the dangers of relying on DG to meet capacity. It
masks the true load growth on the system, and there is insufficient
base capacity in the wires to deliver the power.
This issue can be one of the more limiting with respect to how much
DG can be accommodated on a feeder. It is particularly an issue for
lengthy feeders on which the DG is located some considerable distance
from the substation. This may be an attractive application of DG
because it defers the construction of major wire facilities to serve the
remote area. However, it can come at the cost of having to modify long-
established operating practices and sacrificing some reliability of the
system.
It also suggests one test an analyst can perform to determine if a pro-
posed DG application will likely require changes on the utility system.
The test would be to compute the voltage change that occurs at peak
load if the DG suddenly disconnects. This change should be less than
about 5 percent unless there is fast-acting voltage regulation equip-
ment that can compensate for a larger change. A larger change will
require at least some special studies and possible changes to the volt-
age regulation control on the feeder.
The amount of generation that can be accommodated by this test will
obviously vary with position on the feeder. One useful analysis is to
determine how much DG capacity can be accommodated (without
change) at various distances along the feeder. For example, if one were
to establish a 5 percent change criterion for the limit, there would be a
curve of generation limit versus distance similar to that shown in Fig.
9.16. If a proposed DG application falls to the left of the curve, it is
likely to be acceptable. If it falls to the right, more engineering study is
needed to determine how to accommodate the DG.
This simple analysis will work for one DG site per feeder. This may
be adequate if penetrations of DG are low, but the problem can get com-
plicated quickly as more sites are added. One approach is to study
many random distributions of small DG at peak load. This will result
in a more conservative screening curve that is shifted downward and to
the left.
When something must be done, solutions include:
1. Requiring customer load to disconnect with the DG. This may not be
practical for widespread residential and small commercial loads.
Also, it is difficult to make this transition seamlessly and the load
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
399
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

may suffer downtime anyway, negating positive reliability benefits
of DG.
2. Installing more voltage regulators, each with the ability to bypass
the normal time delay of 30 to 45 s and begin changing taps imme-
diately. This will minimize the inconvenience to other customers.
3. Allow DG to reconnect more quickly than the standard 5-min dis-
connect time. This would be done more safely by using direct com-
munications between the DG and utility system control.
4. Limit the amount of DG on the feeder.
Another voltage regulation issue involving step-voltage regulators is
illustrated in Fig. 9.17. Utility voltage regulators commonly come with
a reverse-power feature that allows the regulators to be used when a
feeder is supplied from its alternate source. The logic is that when the
net power through the regulator is in the reverse direction, the regula-
tor control switches direction and regulates the original source termi-
nal so that the regulator can work properly. Otherwise, the control will
attempt to regulate the alternate source side, which would not be pos-
sible. The tap position would generally move to one extreme or the
other and stay there.
Assume, for example, that several cogeneration sites have been
added to a feeder and there is excess generation when the load is low.
The regulator now senses reverse power and attempts to regulate the
utility source. However, the DG is not nearly as strong as the utility
source and the regulator will not succeed. Similar to the case where the
controls fail to switch direction on the alternate feed, the tap will be run
to an extreme position, often in the worst possible direction.
To prevent this, regulator vendors have come up with cogeneration
features on the controls that can detect this condition. The desired
400
Chapter Nine
Distance from
Substation
5% Voltage Change
Contour
Acceptable
Generation Capacity
More Study
Required
Figure 9.16
Simple voltage change test for screening DG
applications.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

result is to keep the regulator looking in the forward direction. The
line-drop compensator R and X settings may also be changed while the
reverse-power condition exists.
Generation technologies whose output varies rapidly can be difficult
to handle on a distribution feeder. Wind-turbine generation is the most
difficult because there is seldom a substation near the proposed site.
The generation is typically sited several miles from the nearest sub-
station on a feeder that already may have several switched capacitors
and a voltage regulator. One example based on a proposed wind farm
at a ski resort is shown in Fig. 9.18. The line is a typical untransposed,
horizontal crossarm geometry that leads to special issues. As the power
output of the generator varies, one outside phase will tend to rise in
voltage while the other tends to drop. Not only is there a magnitude
issue but a balance issue.
The results of simulating the system voltages for approximately 40 min
with the unchanged control settings are shown in Fig. 9.19. Interestingly,
the bank of single-phase voltage regulators keeps the three-phase volt-
ages reasonably well balanced. There were a few tap changes during this
period, but the greater problem here is the number of capacitor-switching
operations. After changing the capacitor control setting to avoid excessive
operations, the regulator tap changes increase significantly, which is typ-
ical of this kind of generation. Normally, capacitors will switch once or
twice a day and there may be a dozen or so regulator tap changes.
Therefore, subjecting capacitors and regulators to this kind of duty will
almost certainly result in premature failure.
One solution is to increase the bandwidth on the controls so that
there are fewer actions. This will result in more voltage variation, but
it may be tolerable. While the magnitude variation in this case
exceeded 2 percent, it is not changing fast enough to likely cause volt-
age fluctuation complaints.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
401
Net Power
Regulator Moves to
Tap Position Limit
DG
Regulator Switches 
Direction to Try to
Control  This Way
Figure 9.17
Excess DG can fool reverse-power setting on line voltage regu-
lators.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

When the fluctuation is too great, the main recourse is to build a sep-
arate feeder for the wind generation. Also, some wind generators
employ doubly fed wound-rotor induction machines that can control
reactive power very quickly. With proper control, this can help tame the
voltage fluctuations.
9.5.5
Harmonics
Harmonics from DG come from inverters and some synchronous
machines. In the earlier discussion on inverters in this chapter, the
measures to eliminate the larger, low-order harmonics were described.
The PWM switching inverters produce a much lower harmonic current
content than earlier line-commutated, thyristor-based inverters.
In IEEE Standard 519-1992, generators are limited to the most
restrictive values in the tables on the allowable amount of harmonic
current injection. While generator inverters are not necessarily any
worse than power converters used in loads, the developers of the IEEE
402
Chapter Nine
UNTRANSPOSED OVERHEAD
FEEDER, HORIZONTAL
CROSSARM CONSTRUCTION
SWITCHED CAPACITOR
BANKS
32-STEP VOLTAGE
REGULATOR
105%
100%
Capacitor Switching
Regulator Tap
Changes
Figure 9.18
Varying generation can cause excessive duty on utility voltage regulation
equipment.
Figure 9.19
Simulated capacitor switching and regulator tap changes for a wind farm
connected as shown in Fig. 9.18.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

standard allocated all the capacity in the system to loads, leaving very
little for generators. Fortunately, the shift to PWM switching technol-
ogy has made it relatively easy for inverters to meet the standard.
One new distortion problem that arises with the modern inverters is
that the switching frequencies will occasionally excite resonances in
the primary distribution system. This creates nonharmonic frequency
signals typically at the 35th harmonic and higher riding on the voltage
waveform. This has an impact on clocks and other circuitry that depend
on a clean voltage zero crossing. A typical situation in which this might
occur is an industrial park fed by its own substation and containing a
few thousand feet of cable. A quick fix is to add more capacitance in the
form of power factor correction capacitors, being careful not to cause
additional harmful resonances.
As mentioned in the discussion of the characteristics of synchronous
machines, there can be harmonics problems related to zero-sequence
triplen harmonics. Figure 9.20 shows a typical situation where this
occurs. The facility where the generator is located is served at 480 V by
a common delta-wye transformer. When the generator is paralleled to
the utility system through this transformer, the operator is frequently
surprised to find a large amount of current circulating in the neutral.
In the example shown, the current is 26 percent of the machine’s rated
current and is entirely third-harmonic current. This can adversely
affect the operation and efficiency of the machine and may result in the
failure of some circuit element. In this case, the problem is confined to
the generator side of the transformer and does not affect the primary
distribution system because the triplen harmonics are trapped by the
delta winding. The same thing can happen with a grounded wye-wye
transformer, except that the harmonic currents do reach the primary
distribution system.
This problem is well known among vendors of standby generation
equipment. If known beforehand, most will recommend a machine with
a 2/3 winding pitch that can be paralleled without this difficulty. If it is
necessary to parallel a design that does produce significant triplen har-
monics, a reactor can be added in the neutral to limit the current flow
(as in Fig. 9.25). A shorting switch is closed when the generator is used
for backup power to maintain solid grounding.
9.5.6
Islanding
DG protective relays will generally perform their function independently
of any outside knowledge of the system to which they are connected.
Perhaps the greatest fear of the utility protection engineer is that DG
relaying will fail to detect the fact that the utility breaker has opened
and will continue to energize a portion of the feeder. Therefore, much
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
403
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

attention has been paid to detecting islands or forcing islands to
become unstable so they can be detected. The reliability concern is
that other customers will be subjected to such poor-quality voltage
that damage will be sustained. The utility is fearful it will be held
liable for the damage. There is also the safety concern of a generator
accidentally energizing the line resulting in injuries to the public and
utility personnel.
Another concern is the DG itself. Since reclosing is common, it is
essential that the DG detect the island promptly and disconnect. If it is
still connected when the utility breaker recloses, damage can occur to
prime movers, shafts, and components of machines due to the shock
from out-of-phase reclosing. This highlights one area of potential con-
flict with utility practices: Those utilities using instantaneous reclose
may have to extend the reclose intervals to ensure that there is suffi-
cient time for DG to detect the island and disconnect.
Relaying is one way to address the issue. The main keys are to detect
the deviations in voltage and frequency that are outside the values nor-
mally expected while interconnected.
Another approach to anti-islanding is to make requirements for the
operating mode for the DG while interconnected that significantly
reduce the chances that the generation will match the load when an
inadvertent island forms:
■Inverters operating in parallel are less likely to form an island if they
are acting as current sources and have a destabilizing signal that is
constantly trying to shift the frequency reference out of band.5
Islanding would require another source to provide a voltage for the
inverter to follow. Of course, this source could be provided by any syn-
chronous machine DG that remains on the island.
404
Chapter Nine
DELTA-WYE
TRANSFORMER
Z = 5%
3  8.8% = 26%
Third Harmonic
8.8% Third 
Harmonic
277/480V
Xd” = 14%
V3 = 5%
Figure 9.20
Generators with significant third-harmonic voltage distortion
can produce large circulating third-harmonic currents when paralleled with
the utility system.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Interconnected DG should operate in a mode that does not attempt
to regulate voltage. This usually means a constant power factor or
constant reactive power mode. For many inverter-based devices, this
will be unity power factor, producing watts only. Automatic voltage
control should be avoided while DG is interconnected to the distribu-
tion system unless the generator is directly connected to a control
center to receive dispatching and transfer trip signals.
Without the ability to regulate voltage, the match between load and
generation would have to be almost perfect to escape detection by the
protective relaying.
While these measures will work in the vast majority of cases, there
will be some where islanding detection by local intelligence at the DG
site is too uncertain. One example would be large generation that is
permitted to operate with automatic voltage control. In such cases,
direct transfer trip is usually required.
9.5.7
Ferroresonance
This section describes an interesting dilemma that illustrates the con-
flicting requirements that arise when trying to fit DG into a system
that is not designed for it. Ferroresonance is a special kind of resonance
in which the inductive element is the nonlinear characteristic of an
iron-core device.8 Most commonly, ferroresonance occurs when the
magnetizing reactance of a transformer inadvertently is in series with
cable or power factor capacitance.
One interesting case occurs for DG served by cable-fed transform-
ers. It is common practice for the larger DG installations to have
their own transformer. Also, it is nearly universal to require DG to
disconnect at the first sign of trouble on the utility system. This
combination of requirements can lead to a common ferroresonant
condition.
The circuit is shown in Fig. 9.21. Underground cable runs are nor-
mally fused at the point where they are tapped off the overhead feeder
line. This is variously called the riser pole or dip pole. Should some-
thing happen that causes one or two fuses to blow, the relaying on the
DG will detect an unbalanced condition and trip the generator
breaker. This leaves the transformer isolated on the cable with one or
two open phases and no load. Either condition is conducive to fer-
roresonance because the cable capacitance in an open phase, or
phases, now appears in series with the transformer’s magnetizing
impedance (Fig. 9.22).
There are several reasons why the riser-pole fuse may blow or
become open. Normally, they are designed to blow for faults in the
cable, but there are other reasons. Squirrels or snakes may climb the
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
405
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

pole and get in contact with the line. Fuse elements may also fatigue
due to frequent inrush currents or lightning surge currents. Fused
cutouts may open due to corrosion or improper installation. Finally,
they may be operated by a line crew for maintenance purposes.
Whether a blown fuse results in damage is dependent on many vari-
ables and the specific design of the equipment. A number of ferroreso-
nance modes are possible, depending on the connection of the
transformer, its size, and the length of cable. The most susceptible
transformer connections are the ungrounded ones. The delta configu-
ration with one phase open is shown in Fig. 9.21. The overvoltages for
this condition that can occur can easily reach a value of 3 to 4 pu unless
limited by arresters.
Figure 9.23 shows the voltages computed for a 300-kVA delta-con-
nected transformer fed by cable that has 30 nF of capacitance. This
models a case in which there is no load on the transformer and no
arresters. Arresters would clamp the voltage to a lower value unless
they had thermally failed from prolonged exposure to this waveform.
The high voltages and the chaotic waveshape are due to the trans-
406
Chapter Nine
CABLE
CABLE CAPACITANCE
Figure 9.21
DG breaker is required to open when riser-pole fuse blows, leading
to ferroresonance.
Figure 9.22
Schematic showing magnetizing impedance of a delta-connected
transformer in series with cable capacitance when fused cutout is opened.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

former slamming in and out of saturation. The magnetic forces associ-
ated with this change cause the core to emit very loud noises that are
sometimes described as the sound of a large bucket of bolts being
shaken or a chorus of hammers on anvils.
This can cause failures of both the arresters protecting the trans-
formers and the transformers themselves. Arresters fail thermally,
leaving the transformers unprotected. Then the transformers may fail
either from thermal effects or from dielectric failure. It is common for
low-voltage arresters and transient voltage surge suppressors to suffer
failures during this type of ferroresonance.
At one time, it was believed that grounded-wye connections were
impervious to ferroresonance. However, this theory was shown to be
false in a landmark paper.9 While grounded-wye transformers made up
of three single-phase transformers, or a three-phase shell core design,
are immune to this type of ferroresonance, the majority of pad-mounted
transformers used in commercial installations are of three-legged or
five-legged core design. Both are susceptible to ferroresonance due to
phase coupling through the magnetic core. Although not immune, the
overvoltages are lower than with ungrounded connections, typically
ranging from 120 to 200 percent. Sometimes, the voltages are not high
enough to cause failure of the transformer. The utility line crew
responding to a trouble call encounters the transformer making a lot of
noise, but it is still functional with no detectable damage. In other
cases, there could be a burned spot on the paint on the top of the tank
where the high fluxes in the core have caused heating in the tank.
Primary arresters should be tested and the secondary system inspected
for failed equipment before reenergizing.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
407
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
0.000
0.050
0.100
Time, s
0.150
0.200
Voltage, pu
Figure 9.23
Example ferroresonant overvoltages for delta primary.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

This situation is not necessarily unique to DG installations. Many
modern commercial facilities are supplied with cable-fed service trans-
formers that are disconnected from the mains when there is a problem
on the utility system. The purpose would be to switch to UPS systems
or backup generation. Unfortunately, it leaves the transformer isolated
with little or no load.
As a general rule there should be no line fuses or single-phase
reclosers between the generator and the utility substation. This is to
prevent single-phasing the generator, which could not only result in
ferroresonance but could thermally damage rotating machines. This
rule is particularly appropriate for DG with cable-fed service trans-
formers. The riser-pole fuses may be replaced with solid blades (no
fuses) or three-phase switchgear such as a recloser or sectionalizer.
Replacing the fuses with solid blades will reduce the reliability of the
feeder section somewhat. Each time there is a fault on the cable sys-
tem, the entire feeder or feeder section will be out of service. If the cable
is short and dig-ins unlikely, this may very well be the lowest-cost
option. If protection is required, the three-phase switchgear option is
preferred.
The type of ferroresonance shown in Fig. 9.23 is very sensitive to the
amount of load. If the system can be arranged so that there is always a
resistive load attached to the secondary bus, the resonance can be
damped out. The load need not always be large, but must be significant.
In the example cited, a 2 percent load (6 kW) was sufficient. However,
in other cases, more than a 10 percent load may be required.
9.5.8
Shunt capacitor interaction
Utilities use switched capacitors to help support the voltage during
high-load periods. These banks are mostly controlled by local intelli-
gence, switching at predetermined times or at loading levels as mea-
sured by either voltage, current, or kvar. Some types of DG can also
produce reactive power (vars), and this can create control hunting and
other difficulties. There can be several capacitor banks on the feeder as
illustrated in Fig. 9.24. The capacitors switch independently of the gen-
erator control unless special communications and control have been
added to coordinate dispatch. A 2 to 3 percent increase in the voltage is
common when a typical capacitor bank is energized.
Generators in parallel operation are generally maintaining a con-
stant power and power factor. The reactive power of the machine is con-
trolled by the exciter field, which will have certain minimum and
maximum voltage or field excitation limits as indicated on the diagram.
The generator control attempts to maintain a constant reactive power
output until it bumps up against one of these limits.
408
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

There can easily be conditions in which the total reactive power out-
put of the generators and capacitors is too great, resulting in high volt-
ages. This is particularly likely when capacitors are switched by time
clock or by current magnitude (without voltage override). There are at
least three things that can happen at this point to trip the generator:
1. The generator control senses overvoltage at its terminals and
attempts to back down the field to compensate. However, the utility
system overpowers the generator and the field reduces to a level
deemed to be too low for safe operation of the machine.
2. When the generator reaches its voltage limit, reactive power flows
back into the machine. When it reaches a certain level, the genera-
tor protection interprets this as a malfunction.
3. DG that does not produce reactive power simply trips on overvoltage.
9.5.9
Transformer connections
The service transformer used for interconnection can have a great
influence on the impact DG will have on the power quality. The advan-
tages and disadvantages of the common three-phase transformer con-
nections are discussed in this section.
Grounded wye-wye connection.
This is the most common connection
applied in North America for three-phase loads. It is favored because of
its reduced susceptibility to ferroresonance on cable-fed loads and
fewer operating restrictions when being switched for maintenance. It is
also generally well behaved with respect to DG interconnection, but
there are a couple of issues.
Advantages include:
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
409
Figure 9.24
A typical distribution feeder may employ numerous switched
capacitor banks that may interact with generator excitation control and
cause nuisance tripping.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■No phase-shifting of utility-side voltages. This makes detection of
utility faults by DG protection relays more certain.
■Less concern for ferroresonance, but it is not immune to ferroreso-
nance.
Disadvantages include:
■Allows DG to feed all types of faults on the utility system.
■Does not inhibit the flow of zero-sequence harmonic currents that
might be produced from certain kinds of generators.
Because of these two concerns, it may be difficult to parallel some
generators using this transformer connection. If the DG is a synchro-
nous machine, it may produce a small amount of third-harmonic volt-
age distortion, depending on the winding pitch of the machine. If a
synchronous generator does not have a 2/3 winding pitch, paralleling
to the utility system provides a very low impedance path for the third
harmonics and the resulting neutral currents may damage generator
equipment or simply add unwanted harmonic currents to the utility
system. A neutral reactor may be necessary for some wye-connected
machines while they are paralleled to the utility system to
■Limit the flow of zero-sequence harmonics (principally, the third)
■Limit the contribution of the generator to ground faults
The reactor would be shorted when operating the generator stand-
alone to provide emergency backup power so that a stable neutral is
presented to the load.
Delta-wye connection.
This is the second most common connection for
three-phase loads in North America, and the most common in Europe.
It would probably be favored for serving loads in nearly all cases if it
were not for the susceptibility of the connection to ferroresonance in
cable-fed systems.
Advantages include:
■There is less infeed into utility-side ground faults.
■Third harmonics from the DG do not reach the utility system.
■Some isolation from voltage sags due to utility-side SLG faults is pro-
vided.
Disadvantages include:
■It is difficult to detect some SLG faults from the secondary side by
voltage relaying alone.
410
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■It is susceptible to ferroresonance in cable-fed installations.8
■Third harmonics in the DG may cause excessive current in the sec-
ondary-side neutral.
■If islanded on an SLG fault, utility arresters can be subjected to
overvoltages (see Sec. 9.6).
■If arresters are islanded on an SLG fault and there is little load, res-
onant overvoltages can result.
The last two items are common to all transformers with an ungrounded
primary connection.
Note that while this connection prevents third harmonics from the
generator from reaching the utility system, it does not prevent their
flow on the DG side (see Fig. 9.20). As with the grounded wye-wye con-
nection, it is generally not advisable to directly connect synchronous
alternators that are not 2/3 pitch without inserting an impedance in
the neutral to limit the third-harmonic current flow (Fig. 9.25).
While the phase shift can be beneficial to the load in reducing the
impact of voltage sags due to SLG faults, it also makes some SLG faults
on the utility system more difficult to detect. This increases the
chances of islanding at least briefly because it delays fault detection
until the utility breaker operates.
Therefore, it is common to add other relaying functions to aid in the
early detection of utility-side faults. A negative-sequence relay can
make the detection more reliable. While the voltage magnitudes seen
on the secondary may not change much during a fault, they will be
unbalanced, resulting in detectable negative-sequence voltages and
currents.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
411
DELTA-WYE
TRANSFORMER
OPTIONAL
NEUTRAL
REACTOR AND
BYPASS
SWITCH
TRANSFORMER
FUSES
Figure 9.25
Delta-wye transformer connection.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Another approach is to add relaying on the primary side of the trans-
former, such as a type 59G relay ground overvoltage that can detect the
presence of the SLG fault. This is an overvoltage relay placed in the
corner of a broken delta potential transformer that measures zero-
sequence voltage.
Delta-delta or ungrounded wye-delta connection.
While not in the majority,
these connections are still common for commercial and industrial loads.
Both have similar behavior with respect to serving DG. Neither would be
the preferred connection for serving most new DG installations, but could
be encountered in legacy systems where a customer wishes to parallel DG.
Some inverter-based systems (fuel cells, photovoltaics, microtur-
bines, etc.) require an ungrounded connection on the DG side because
the dc side of the inverter is grounded. This is often accomplished by
use of a separate isolation transformer rather than the main service
transformer. However, either of these connections would also suffice.
The delta secondary is sometimes a four-wire connection with one of the
delta legs center-tapped and grounded to serve single-phase 120-V loads.
This is common in smaller commercial facilities that have three-phase
HVAC equipment along with typical office load. If this is the case, no part
of a three-phase DG can be grounded while paralleled with the grid.
Advantages include:
■More economical transformer installation for smaller three-phase
service with some single-phase loads is possible.
■The load is isolated from ground faults on the utility side.
■DG would not typically feed utility-side ground faults except when
resonance occurs.
■Ungrounded interconnection can be provided for inverter-based sys-
tems requiring it.
Disadvantages include:
■Utility-side SLG faults are difficult to detect.
■Utility arresters are subjected to high steady-state overvoltages if
islanded on an SLG fault (see Fig. 9.26). This is true for delta-wye
connections as well.
■These connections are highly susceptible to ferroresonance in cable-
fed installations.
■There are more restrictions on switching for utility maintenance.
Three-phase switchgear may be required on the primary because there
are several problems that can occur if one attempts to perform single-
phase switching. This will increase the cost of the interconnection.
412
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The prompt detection of SLG utility faults using voltage relaying is a
problem with these connections. This will delay fault detection until
after the utility breaker has opened, resulting in at least a brief island.
This can result in overvoltages and a resonant condition common to all
ungrounded primary connections. Supplementing voltage relaying with
negative-sequence relaying on the DG side can make the detection more
certain. Also, it is common to add a ground overvoltage relay (59G) on
the primary side to detect the continuing presence of a ground fault.
Grounded wye-delta connection.
This is an interesting connection
because of the conflicting application considerations. Many utility engi-
neers believe this is the best winding connection for interconnecting
generation to the utility system. This is the connection used for nearly
all central station generation. There are many advantages, including:
1. Utility-side faults are easily detected partly because the trans-
former itself actively participates in ground faults.
2. Triplen harmonic voltages produced by the generator do not cause any
current to flow because it is blocked by the delta winding. Therefore,
nearly any generator can be paralleled with this connection.
3. Protection schemes are well understood based on many years of
experience with utility generation.
Despite these benefits, one may be surprised to learn that this connec-
tion is not permitted on distribution systems without a great deal of
study and special considerations that may result in costly modifica-
tions to the system. In fact, it may not be possible to accommodate the
connection on some distribution systems because of the inconvenience
to other customers.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
413
G
ARRESTERS
SUBJECTED TO
LINE-TO-LINE
VOLTAGES
PERMANENT
LINE-TO-GROUND
FAULT
UTILITY
INTERRUPTING
DEVICE OPEN
UNGROUNDED
TRANSFORMER
CONNECTION
Figure 9.26
Isolating DG with ungrounded service transformer connection on an SLG
fault can lead to arrester failure.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The connection is often referred to as a “ground source” because it con-
tributes to ground faults and will generally disrupt the ground fault
relaying coordination on the feeder. Other feeders connected to the same
substation bus may be disrupted also. Figure 9.27 shows how the con-
nection contributes to an SLG fault on a four-wire, multigrounded neu-
tral distribution system, the most common in the United States. The
thicker arrows show the normal contribution expected from the main util-
ity source. Only one phase is involved on the distribution side, and the
fault appears to be a line-to-line fault from the transmission side. The
thinner arrows show the paths of the current from the grounded wye-
delta interconnection transformer. The currents flow back through the
substation and contribute additional current to the fault. The amount
contributed would depend on the size and impedance of the transformer.
The generator contribution is not shown in Fig. 9.27 for clarity. This
contribution will be dependent on the capability of the DG to feed a
short circuit. In some cases, the contribution due to the transformer
alone will be larger.
This characteristic has a number of possible adverse side effects
when present on the distribution system:
■Increased fault current means increased damage at the fault site,
which will eventually lead to more sustained interruptions and
reduced reliability.
■The connection is likely to cause sympathetic tripping of the feeder
breaker for faults on other feeders. The transformer supplies ground
414
Chapter Nine
G
(MULTIGROUNDED NEUTRAL)
FAULT
CONTRIBUTION
FROM DR
TRANSFORMER
MAIN FAULT
CONTRIBUTION
FROM EPS
Figure 9.27
Grounded-wye-delta connection acts as a “ground source” feeding
ground faults.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

current to other feeders connected to the same substation bus. Many
customers who would normally see only a sag would be subjected to
interruptions.
■Ground trip pickup levels must be increased, and more delay must be
used to maintain coordination, which results in less sensitive fault
protection. (An alternative is to use directional overcurrent relaying.)
■Sags for ground faults will generally be somewhat deeper (the trans-
former makes the system appear more solidly grounded).
■If fuse saving is being attempted, the fault infeed, which is likely to
be larger than from the DG itself, makes this much more difficult to
achieve.
■The transformer itself is subject to short-circuit failure when a
ground fault occurs. This is particularly true for smaller transformer
banks with impedances less than 4 percent. A special transformer
must generally be ordered.
■The transformer is also subject to failure thermally because the
feeder load is rarely balanced. Thus, the transformer will act as a
sink for zero-sequence load currents.
The distribution system can almost always be engineered to work
with grounded wye-delta connections. This makes the DG interconnec-
tion protection more certain and straightforward. However, this may
require costly modifications that could become an insurmountable bar-
rier for small- and medium-sized DG. The utility must also be willing
to accept special transformers and operating procedures that are dif-
ferent from the rest of the system. Some utilities are unwilling to do
this. One danger is that if the transformer were to fail at some time in
the future, those replacing it might not be aware that it requires a cer-
tain minimum impedance to prevent failure. Replacing it with a con-
ventional transformer may result in catastrophic failure of the
transformer. This is a particular issue when line crews from other com-
panies have to be brought in during disasters. Thus, many utility com-
panies understandably resist use of special options.
9.6
DG on Low-Voltage Distribution
Networks*
The discussions in this chapter focus primarily on DG interconnected
to radial primary or secondary distribution circuits, which is the most
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
415
*The text in this section is derived from lecture material originally developed by D. C.
Dawson and W. E. Feero for the University of Wisconsin—Madison course
“Interconnecting Distributed Generation to Utility Distribution Systems” and is used
here with permission.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

common distribution configuration. However, in large cities a number
of utilities use a low-voltage network method of distribution.
These low-voltage network systems are of two major subtypes, the
secondary network (also referred to as an area network, grid network,
or street network) and the spot network. Secondary networks serve
numerous sites, usually several city blocks, from a grid of low-voltage
mains at 120/208 V, three-phase. Spot networks serve a single site, usu-
ally a large building or even a portion of a large building. The sec-
ondary voltage of spot networks is often 277/480 V, three-phase, but
120/208-V spot networks are also used.
Street networks and spot networks are supplied from two or more pri-
mary distribution feeders through integrated transformer/breaker/pro-
tection combinations called network units. These network units are
often located in transformer vaults within the building or in under-
ground vaults in the street.
Figure 9.28 shows a spot network arrangement with three primary
feeders. The primary feeders may be dedicated to the spot network,
may serve other network units at different sites, or may serve ordinary
radial distribution loads as well.
The objective of the network distribution design is to achieve high ser-
vice reliability with high power quality. To accomplish this, the primary
feeders are often chosen so that they originate at different substations
or, at least at different bus sections of the same substation. As will be
explained in Sec. 9.6.1, the high power quality is achieved by having full
416
Chapter Nine
Y
NWP
Y
Y
Network Units
To Facility
Switchgear
Primary Feeders
to other
network units
to other
network units
to other
network units
Figure 9.28
Spot network arrangement.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

service capability with any feeder out of service and rapidly removing
any faulted feeder from connection to the low-voltage network.
9.6.1
Fundamentals of network operation
To gain an understanding of how the operation of networks differs from
radial service, we will concentrate on the spot network. In normal oper-
ation, the spot network is supplied simultaneously from all the primary
feeders, by paralleling the low-voltage secondaries of the network
transformers on the spot network bus. In order that the spot network
can continue to operate if a primary feeder becomes faulted, the net-
work units are each equipped with a low-voltage circuit breaker, called
the network protector, and a directional-power relay called the network
relay or master relay.
When a primary feeder is faulted, the network relay senses reverse
power flow (from the network toward the primary feeder) and opens the
network protector, thereby isolating the network bus from the faulted
feeder and allowing service on the network to continue without interrup-
tion. This function is the reason for the name network protector and the
reason why DG interconnection to networks becomes a complex issue.
Figure 9.29 shows the operation of a network protector in isolating a
faulted primary feeder. Later, when the faulted primary feeder is
repaired and returned to service, the network relay senses voltage at
the transformer side of the open network protector. If this voltage is
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
417
Y
NWP
Y
Y
Network Units
To Facility
Switchgear
Primary Feeders
to other
network units
to other
network units
to other
network units
opens
opens
Figure 9.29
Network primary feeder fault.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

such that power will flow from the network unit to the bus when the
protector is closed, the network relay commands the protector switch to
reclose. Determining when this reclose will take place may become an
interconnection issue.
The network relay is a very sensitive reverse-power relay, with a
pickup level on the order of 0.1 percent of the rated power of the net-
work transformer. These settings can be as low as 1 to 2 kW. It is the
mission of the reverse-power relay to be capable of sensing reverse
power flow with no other feeder loads than the core losses of its own
network transformer. This great sensitivity is necessary because the
network protector must operate for all types of faults on the primary
feeder, including ground faults. Since a delta-connected primary is
commonly used on network transformers, no ground fault current will
flow from the network toward the primary feeder once the source sub-
station feeder circuit breaker has opened. The primary feeder may
have no other loads, or the only other loads may be other network units
that have already disconnected from the faulty feeder. Thus the net-
work relay must be capable of sensing reverse power using only its own
transformer’s losses.
This sensitive reverse-power function means that no DG can be con-
nected to the network with the intent to export power to the utility
system. It further means that even momentary power reversals under
abnormal conditions must be considered in the interconnection
design.
The traditional network relay is an electromechanical device and has
no intentional time delay. The typical operating time is about 0.05 s 
(3 cycles) at normal voltage levels, thus the reason that even momen-
tary power reversals caused by the DG are of concern. Microprocessor-
based network relays have replaced the electromechanical types in new
network units, and these relays can be retrofitted into many types of
existing network units. The basic performance of the microprocessor
types is similar to the electromechanicals, but they have more flexibil-
ity and new features.
The network protector is an air circuit breaker specifically designed
for the fault current conditions encountered on low-voltage network
systems. It operates only under the control of the network relay. The
network protector has no overcurrent protection and does not open for
faults on the low-voltage secondary system. Low-voltage faults are
cleared by fuses or by circuit breakers within the served facility. The
most critical design characteristic of almost all network protectors in
service is that they are not intended to separate two operating electri-
cal systems. Therefore, a DG can never be allowed to island on a net-
work bus.
418
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

9.6.2
Summary of network interconnection
issues
From the discussion in this section it is clear that installing DG in facil-
ities served by a spot network has a number of special application prob-
lems that do not arise in the usual radial service arrangement.
1. Exporting power from a spot network, or even serving the entire
facility load from a DG, is not practical because of the reverse-power
method of protection used on the network units. If DG exceeds the on-
site load, even momentarily, power flows from the network toward the
primary feeders and the network relays will open their network pro-
tectors, isolating the network from its utility supply. Minimum site
loads, such as late-night or weekend loads, may severely limit the size
or operating hours of a DG. Even if a DG is sized to the site’s minimum
load, consideration has to be given to the possibility of sudden loss of
a large load, which might cause reverse power flow through the net-
work units.
2. Network protectors built in accordance with ANSI/IEEE
Standard C57.12.44-1994 are not required to withstand the 180° out-
of-phase voltages that could exist across an open switch with DG on the
network. They also are not required to interrupt fault currents with
higher X/R ratios than those usually encountered in low-voltage net-
work systems. A serious failure of a network protector on a network in
New Mexico during installation test of DG demonstrated the reality of
this problem.
3. The fault current delivery from synchronous DG to external faults
can cause network protectors to open, potentially isolating the net-
work. Figure 9.30 shows an example of how this can happen. As noted
earlier in this chapter, it cannot be determined how induction genera-
tors will contribute to unbalanced and high-impedance faults at such
locations without detailed studies. If such studies are absent, induction
generators should be treated as if they have synchronous generation
capability in selecting the appropriate interconnection response to this
remote fault issue.
4. If the network protectors open, isolating the network and the DG
from the utility source, the network relay may repeatedly attempt to
reclose the network protector, leading to destruction of the protector
and the possibility of catastrophic failure of the network unit.
5. The network relays are part of an integrated assembly in a sub-
mersible enclosure, often mounted in vaults in the street, and are not
as easily modified as a typical relay control scheme.
6. Referring back to Fig. 9.28, if the bus tie breaker is operated open,
or a second substation is used to supply the network, then there is a
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
419
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

possibility that protector cycling would occur under light-load condi-
tions. The addition of DG to the network bus will worsen this condition.
Making the determination of when and where the cycling problem
might emerge is particularly difficult on street networks without the
aid of sophisticated load flow simulations.
9.6.3
Integration techniques for DG on
networks
Despite this daunting list of problems, there are some ways that DG
may be accommodated on spot networks, by taking advantage of new
technology. Inverter-based DG has the advantages that fault current is
very limited, to about 100 to 200 percent of the normal inverter load
current, and that an inverter can respond very rapidly to signals con-
trolling its power output level. Figure 9.31 shows a network DG instal-
lation that uses this approach.
Because the most critical aspect of DG on networks is that the local
generation must never exceed the local load, this example uses a tie-
line load control scheme that senses the total incoming power to the
facility and adjusts the DG power output to ensure that power flow is
always inward.
Other approaches that might be used are
420
Chapter Nine
Y
NWP
Y
Y
Network Units
Primary Feeders
Y
Local
Gen
Protectors Open on
Fault Current Flow
Fault
Figure 9.30
Fault current from synchronous local generation.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Size the DG to be less than the minimum load that ever exists on the
network, with a margin for sudden loss of a large load.
■Total the incoming power to the network and trip the DG whenever
the inward power flow falls below a safe value.
All three of these approaches seek to avoid opening the network pro-
tectors by limiting the DG to less than the on-site load. Note that if
cycling is a problem, then these techniques can be used to establish
minimum load where cycling will not be experienced. Because of the
high-speed response of the network relays, there may not be much time
available to measure power flow and make a control decision. This
problem can be eased by arranging the network relays to have a time
delay at low reverse-power levels, e.g., reverse flow less than the rated
capacity of the network transformer. For the high levels of reverse
power flow that occur during multiphase faults on the primary feeders,
the network relays still operate instantaneously. Figure 9.32 shows the
adjustable features of the time-delayed network relays.
Time delay on low reverse power is a technique that has been used
for many years to deal with regenerative loads such as elevators.
Modern microprocessor-based network relays generally have this
capability built in. The advantage of the microprocessor is that this
time delay can be as short as 6 cycles. If the instantaneous trip thresh-
old can be kept at or below the rating of the transformer, then such a
brief time delay may be acceptable from a power quality standpoint. A
supplementary overcurrent and time-delay relay is needed to add the
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
421
Y
NWP
Y
Y
Network Units
Primary Feeders
Local
Gen
Load
–

Substation
Facility
Loads
Tie-Line
Load
Cont.
Figure 9.31
Inverter-based DG on a spot network.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

capability to electromechanical network relays. In the past, these sup-
plemental relays had minimum time delays of 1 s or more since their
mission was to wait for the elevator to descend. However, not all util-
ities endorse this low-current, time-delay technique. Some feel that
any time delay in opening the network protectors degrades the high
service quality that the network system is intended to provide.
The load-generation control and DG tripping schemes mentioned
above are intended to ensure that the network protectors are never
opened by exported power. As long as the schemes work properly, the
network protectors are never exposed to the out-of-phase voltage con-
ditions that may exceed the switch capability. However, because of the
potentially catastrophic consequences of causing a network protector
failure, it is prudent to provide a backup. An interlocking scheme that
trips the DG instantaneously when a certain number of network pro-
tectors have opened ensures that the network protectors will not be
exposed to out-of-phase voltages for more than a few cycles. The deci-
sion as to how many protectors must open before the DG is tripped
(one, two, or all) is a tradeoff between security of the protectors and
nuisance tripping of the DG. Note that this scheme does not relieve the
DG installer from the responsibility of providing stuck-breaker backup
protection for the DG’s switching device.
An even more secure approach to avoiding overstressing the network
protectors is to replace existing protectors with new designs that are
capable of interrupting fault currents from sources with higher X/R
422
Chapter Nine
Time
Adjustable
delay time
Time delay for
low currents
Adjustable
instantaneous trip
threshold
Instantaneous trip
for higher currents
100
Current (% of transformer rating)
Figure 9.32
Adjustable reverse-power characteristic.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ratios and of withstanding out-of-phase voltages across the open
switch. One major U.S. manufacturer of network protector units has
recently introduced such high-capacity protectors in 800- to 2250-A rat-
ings and plans to introduce them in ratings up to 6000 A. These pro-
tectors are designed to be retrofitted in many existing types of network
units.
A possible DG interconnection problem exists that would involve net-
work protectors without a network bus interconnection. If a DG is
interconnected on a feeder that also supplies a network unit, then if its
feeder breaker is tripped and the DG is not rapidly isolated, it may
impact one or more of the network units as if it were isolated on the net-
work bus. For this type of event to occur, the DG output does not have
to be matched to the feeder load. For the excess generation case, it only
has to be momentarily greater than the load on the network bus. Under
this condition the power continues to flow to the network bus from the
feeder with the interconnected DG, which keeps that protector closed.
However, the excess power flows through the network back to the other
feeders, resulting in the opening of the protectors connected to those
feeders. Once open, these protectors will be separating two indepen-
dent systems. For the case of less generation than load, the protector
connecting to the feeder with the generation may trip. Again, such a
condition would have a protector separating two independent systems.
Therefore, such DG applications should be avoided unless the DG
breaker is interlocked with the feeder breaker with a direct transfer
trip scheme.
9.7
Siting DG
The value of DG to the power delivery system is very much dependent
on time and location. It must be available when needed and must be
where it is needed. This is an often neglected or misunderstood concept
in discussions about DG. Many publications on DG assume that if 1
MW of DG is added to the system, 1 MW of additional load can be
served. This is not always true.
Utility distribution engineers generally feel more comfortable with
DG installed on facilities they maintain and control. The obvious choice
for a location is a substation where there is sufficient space and com-
munications to control centers. This is an appropriate location if the
needs are capacity relief on the transmission system or the substation
transformer. It is also adequate for basic power supply issues, and one
will find many peaking units in substations. However, to provide sup-
port for distribution feeders, the DG must be sited out on the feeder
away from the substation. Such generation will also relieve capacity
constraints on transmission and power supply. In fact, it is more effec-
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
423
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tive than the same amount of DG installed in the substation.
Unfortunately, this generation is usually customer-owned and distrib-
ution planners are reluctant to rely on it for capacity.
The application of DG to relieve feeder capacity constraints is illus-
trated in Fig. 9.33. The feeder load has grown to where it exceeds a
limit on the feeder. This limit could be imposed by either current rat-
ings on lines or switchgear. It could also be imposed by bus voltage lim-
its. There is DG on the feeder at a location where it can actually relieve
the constraint and is dispatched near the daily peak to help serve the
load. The straightforward message of the figure is that the load that
would otherwise have to be curtailed can now be served. Therefore, the
reliability has been improved.
This application is becoming more common as a means to defer
expansion of the wire-based power delivery infrastructure. The gener-
ation might be leased for a peak load period. However, it is more com-
mon to offer capacity credits to customers located in appropriate areas
to use their backup generation for the benefit of the utility system. If
there are no customers with DG in the area, utilities may lease space
to connect generation or, depending on regulatory rules, may provide
some incentives for customers to add backup generation.
There is by no means universal agreement that this is a permanent
solution to the reliability problem. When utility planners are shown
Fig. 9.33, most will concede the obvious, but not necessarily agree that
this situation represents an improvement in reliability. Three of the
stronger arguments are
1. If the feeder goes out, only the customer with the DG sees an
improvement in reliability. There is no noticeable change in the ser-
vice reliability indices.
424
Chapter Nine
Feeder Limit
DG Dispatched
ON
Daily Load Profile
DG Sited to Provide Feeder Relief
Figure 9.33
DG sited to relieve feeder overload constraint.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2. Customer generation cannot be relied upon to start when needed.
Thus, the reliability cannot be expected to improve.
3. Using customer-owned generation in this fashion masks the true
load growth. Investment in wire facilities lags behind demand,
increasing the risk that the distribution system will eventually not
be able to serve the load.
It should also be noted that the capacity relief benefit is nullified
when the distribution system is upgraded and no longer has a con-
straint. Thus, capacity credits offered for this application generally
have a short term ranging from 6 months to 1 year.
If one had to choose a location on the distribution feeder, where
should the DG be located? The optimal DG siting problem is similar to
the optimal siting problem for shunt capacitor banks. Many of the same
algorithms can be used with the chief difference being that the object
being added produces watts in addition to vars. Some of the same rules
of thumb also apply. For example, if the load is uniformly distributed
along the feeder, the optimal point for loss reduction and capacity relief
is approximately two-thirds of the way down the main feeder. When
there are more generators to consider, the problem requires computer
programs for analysis.
The utility does not generally have a choice in the location of feeder-
connected DG. The location is given for customer-owned generation,
and the problem is to determine if the location has any capacity-related
value to the power delivery system. Optimal siting algorithms can be
employed to evaluate the relative value of alternative sites.
One measure of the value of DG in a location is the additional
amount of load that can be served relative to the size of the DG.
Transmission networks are very complex systems that are sometimes
constrained by one small area that affects a large geographical area. A
relatively small amount of load reduction in the constrained area
allows several times that amount of load to be served by the system.
This effect can also be seen on distribution feeders. Because of the
simple, radial structure of most feeders, there is generally not a con-
straint so severe that DG application will allow the serving of addi-
tional load several times greater than the size of the generator.
However, there can be a multiplying effect as illustrated in Fig. 9.34.
This example assumes that the constraint is on the feeder rather
than on the substation. If 1 MW of generation were placed in the sub-
station, no additional load could be served on the feeder because no
feeder relief has been achieved. However, if there is a good site on the
feeder, the total feeder load often can grow by as much as 1.4 MW. This
is a typical maximum value for this measure of DG benefit on radial
distribution feeders.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
425
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Another application that is becoming common is the use of DG to
cover contingencies. Traditionally, utilities have built sufficient wire-
based delivery capacity to serve the peak load assuming one major fail-
ure (the so-called N-1 contingency design criterion). At the distribution
feeder level, this involves adding sufficient ties to other feeders so that
the load can be conveniently switched to an alternate feeder when a
failure occurs. There must also be sufficient substation capacity to
serve the normal load and the additional load expected to be switched
over during a failure. This results in substantial overcapacity when the
system is in its normal state with no failures.
One potentially good economic application of DG is to provide sup-
port for feeders when it is necessary to switch them to an alternate
source while repairs are made. Figure 9.35 depicts the use of DG
located on the feeder for this purpose. This will be substantially less
costly than building a new feeder or upgrading a substation to cover
this contingency.
The DG in this case is located near the tie-point between two feeders.
It is not necessarily used for feeder support during normal conditions
although there would often be some benefits to be gained by operating
the DG at peak load. When a failure occurs on either side of the tie, the
open tie switch is closed to pick up load from the opposite side. The DG
is dispatched on and connected to help support the backup feeder.
Locating the DG in this manner gives the utility additional flexibil-
ity and more reconfiguration options. Currently, the most common DG
technology used for this application is currently diesel gensets. The
gensets may be mounted on portable trailers and leased only for the
peak load season when a particular contingency leaves the system vul-
nerable. One or more units may be interconnected through a pad-
426
Chapter Nine
Pload
Pgen
= 0
Pload
Pgen
= 1.4
Figure 9.34
Ability of DG to increase the capacity of a distribution feeder is
dependent on DG location.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

mounted transformer and may also employ a recloser with a DG pro-
tection relay. This makes a compact and safe interconnection package
using equipment familiar to utility personnel.
9.8
Interconnection Standards
Standards for interconnection of DG to distribution systems are exam-
ined in this section. Two examples illustrating the range of require-
ments for interconnection protection are presented.
9.8.1
Industry standards efforts
There have been two main DG interconnection standards efforts in the
United States. IEEE Standard 929-20005 was developed to address
requirements for inverters used in photovoltaic systems interconnected
with utility systems. The standard has been generally applied to all
technologies requiring an inverter interface. One of the main issues
this standard addresses is the anti-islanding scheme. The basic idea is
to introduce a destabilizing signal into the switching control so that it
will quickly drift in frequency if allowed to run isolated while the con-
trol thinks it is still interconnected. Amid fears that vendors would
independently choose schemes that might cancel out each other, agree-
ment was reached on a uniform direction to drive the frequency.
Another, more contested effort has been the development of IEEE
Standard P1547,10 which has not been approved as of the time of this
writing. The intent is to develop a national standard that will apply to
the interconnection of all types of DG to both the radial and network dis-
tribution systems. Vendors, utilities, and end users have joined in this
effort, which appears to be converging. This draft standard addresses
many of the issues described in this chapter, and the approach taken
here is largely consistent with the contents of this document.
9.8.2
Interconnection requirements
The basic requirements for interconnecting DG to the utility distribu-
tion system are listed here.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
427
Figure 9.35
DG sited near the tie-point between two feeders to help support
contingencies.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Voltage regulation.
DG shall not attempt to regulate voltage while
interconnected unless special agreement is reached with the utility. As
pointed out previously, this generally means that the DG will operate
at a constant power factor or constant reactive power output acceptable
to the operation of the system. Inverters in utility-interactive mode
would typically operate by producing a current in phase with the volt-
age to achieve a particular power output level.
Anti-islanding.
DG shall have relaying that is capable of detecting
when it is operating as an island and disconnect from the power sys-
tem. Inverters should be compliant with IEEE Standard 929-2000 such
that they would naturally drift in frequency when isolated from the
utility source. Relaying to detect resonant conditions that might occur
should be applied in susceptible DG applications.
Fault detection.
DG shall have relaying capable of detecting faults on
the utility system and disconnecting after a time delay of typically 0.16
to 2.0 s, depending on the amount of deviation from normal. DG should
disconnect sufficiently early in the first reclose interval to allow tem-
porary faults to clear. (The utility may have to extend the first reclose
interval to ensure that this can be accomplished.) However, to prevent
nuisance tripping of the DG, the tripping should not be too fast. The
0.16-s (10 cycles at 60 Hz) delay is to allow time for faults on the trans-
mission system or adjacent feeder to clear before tripping the DG need-
lessly.
Settings proposed for voltage and frequency relays for this applica-
tion are given in Table 9.1.10 The cutoff voltages are nominal guidelines
and may have to be modified for some applications. A common adjust-
ment is to decrease the voltage trip levels to avoid nuisance tripping for
faults on parallel feeders. For example, faults on parallel feeders will
sometimes give voltages less than 50 percent, requiring the setting on
428
Chapter Nine
TABLE 9.1
Typical Voltage and
Frequency Relay Settings for DG
Interconnection for a 60-Hz System
Condition
Clearing time, s
V  50%
0.16
50%  V  88%
2.0
110%  V  120%
1.0
V  120%
0.16
f  59.3 Hz
0.16
f  60.5 Hz
0.16
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the 10-cycle trip to be reduced to perhaps 40 percent. The frequency
trip settings may be adjusted according to local standards. Some utili-
ties may want larger DG to remain connected to a much lower fre-
quency (e.g., 57 Hz) to help with system stability issues following loss
of a major generating plant or a tie-line.
Direct transfer trip (optional).
For applications where it is difficult to
detect islands and utility-side faults, or where it is not possible to coor-
dinate with utility fault-clearing devices, direct transfer trip should be
applied such that the DG interconnect breaker is tripped simultane-
ously with the utility breaker. Transfer trip is usually advisable when
DG is permitted to operate with automatic voltage control because this
situation is much more likely to support an inadvertent island.
Transfer trip is relatively costly and is generally applied only on large
DG systems. Two relaying schemes for meeting these requirements are
presented in Secs. 9.8.3 and 9.8.4.
9.8.3
A simple interconnection
The protection scheme shown in Fig. 9.36 applies to small systems that
are not expected to be able to support islands by themselves. There is
not universal agreement on what constitutes a “small” DG system.
Some utilities draw the line at 30 kW, while others might restrict this
to less than 10 kW. Some may allow this kind of interface protection for
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
429
SERVICE
TRANSFORMER
?
?
LOAD
DR
27/59
81 O/U
Figure 9.36
Simple interconnection protection scheme for
smaller generators.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

sizes up to 100 kW, or more. The two relaying functions shown are
expected to do most of the work even for large DG systems. Large sys-
tems have additional relaying to provide a greater margin of safety.
Small DG systems would commonly be connected to the load bus at
secondary voltage levels. There would not be a separate transformer,
although there may be separate metering. Overcurrent protection is
provided by molded case circuit breakers. The main DG interface pro-
tection functions are
1. Over/under (O/U) voltage (27/59 relay)
2. Over/under frequency (81 O/U relay)
These relays can be used to trip either the generator breaker or the
main service breaker, depending on the desired mode of operation.
Tripping only the generator leaves the load connected, and this is prob-
ably the desired operation for most loads employing small cogeneration
or peaking generators. However, the utility may require the main
breaker to be tripped if the DG system is running when a disturbance
occurs.
The main service breaker would also be tripped if the DG system is
to be used for backup power so that the DG system can continue to sup-
ply the load off-line. It should be noted that special controls (not shown
in Fig. 9.36) may be required for this transfer to occur seamlessly. It is
not always easy to accomplish.
The over/under voltage relay has the primary responsibility to detect
utility-side disturbances. There should be no frequency deviation until
the utility fault interrupter opens. If the fault is very close to the gen-
erator interconnection point and the voltage sag is deep, the overcur-
rent relaying may also see the fault. This will depend on the capability
of the DG system to supply fault current. The overcurrent breakers are
necessary for protecting the DG system in case of an internal fault.
Once the distribution feeder is separated from the utility bulk power
system, an island forms. The voltage and frequency relays then work
in concert to detect the island. One would normally expect the voltage
to collapse very quickly and be detected by the undervoltage relay. If
this does not happen for some reason, the frequency should quickly
drift outside the narrow band expected while interconnected so that the
81 O/U relay would detect it.
9.8.4
A complex interconnection
The second protection scheme described here represents the other
extreme from the simple scheme presented in Sec. 9.8.3. Figure 9.37
shows the key functions in an actual distribution-connected DG instal-
lation that employs a primary-side recloser. This is a relatively complex
430
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

interconnection protection scheme for a large synchronous generator.
There are many other variant schemes that may also be applied, and
the reader is referred to vendors of DG packages whose literature
describes these in great detail.
A large DG installation on the distribution system would typically
correspond to generators in the 1- to 10-MW range. Most generators
larger than this will be interconnected at the transmission level and
have relaying similar to utility central station generation.
Figure 9.37 shows the relays necessary for interface protection as
well as some of the relays necessary for generator protection. Not all
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
431
Figure 9.37
Protection scheme for a large synchronous generator with high-
side recloser.
81 O/U
27/59
47
59 I
59 N
25
46
50/51V
DG
87G
32R
40
46
50/51
(GENERATOR PROTECTION)
51G
UTILITY
BREAKER OR
RECLOSER
GENERATOR
TRANSFORMER
ANOTHER
GENERATOR
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the functions that might be necessary for proper control of the genera-
tor, interlocking of breakers, etc., are shown. This installation is com-
prised of multiple generators connected identically.
In this example, there is a primary-side utility breaker for which
utilities will typically use a common three-phase recloser. This is a con-
venient switchgear package for utilities to install and probably the
least costly as well. The recloser comes with overcurrent relaying (not
shown), and a separate DG relay package has been added that operates
off a separate potential transformer. This is the main breaker used to
achieve or ensure separation of the generator(s) from the utility.
The relaying elements in the system and their function are as fol-
lows.
Primary side
■27/59: standard under/over voltage relay.
This serves as the pri-
mary means of fault and island detection. This can be used to block
closing of the breaker until there is voltage present on the utility sys-
tem, or there may be a separate relay for that purpose.
■81 O/U: standard over/under frequency relay for islanding detection.
■47: negative-sequence voltage relay (optional).
This is a backup
means for detecting utility-side faults that can be more sensitive than
voltage magnitudes in some cases. Also, it helps prevent generator
damage due to unbalance, although there is another relay for that
here.
■59I: instantaneous (peak) overvoltage.
This is a supplemental
islanding detection function. This would be employed in cases where
ferroresonance or other resonance phenomena are likely. This would
occur when utility-side capacitors interact with the generator reac-
tance. Since such overvoltages can cause damage quickly, the time
delay is much shorter than for the other relays—but not so short that
it trips on utility capacitor-switching transients.
■59N (or 59G): neutral or ground overvoltage.
This relay is installed
in the corner of a broken delta connection on the potential trans-
former. It is a supplemental fault and islanding detection relay func-
tion that measures the zero-sequence voltage. This would detect
conditions in which the generator is islanded on an SLG fault. It is
more necessary when the primary connection of the transformer is
delta or ungrounded-wye.
These relaying functions may be moved to the secondary side of the ser-
vice transformer if there is no high-side breaker. The relays would then
trip the main breaker on the secondary side.
432
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

No reverse power (32) function is used at this interface because net
export is expected.
Generator side
■50/51: overcurrent relay.
Responsible for tripping the main breaker
for faults within the generator system. May also trip for faults on the
utility system that the generator feeds. Therefore, the time delay
must be coordinated with the other relays so that it does not trip
inadvertently.
■46 relay at transformer: negative-sequence current.
Assists in the
detection of faults on the utility system, particularly open-phase con-
ditions, and trips the main breaker. (Generators have a separate 46
relay.)
■25: synchronizing relay.
Controls closing of the main breaker when
the generators are being interconnected to the utility. (This scheme
would also require synchronous check relays on the individual gen-
erators if they are to be interconnected separately.)
Generator protection
■87G: differential ground relay.
For fast detection of ground faults
within the generator.
■51G: ground overcurrent.
Trips the generator for high neutral cur-
rents indicative of a ground fault on the secondary system.
■32R: reverse-power relay.
This relay detects power going into the
generator, which would indicate a fault. Can be set very sensitive.
■40: loss of field relay.
■46: negative-sequence current.
Protects the machine against exces-
sive unbalanced currents, which may result from an internal fault
but may also be due to unbalance on the utility system.
■50/51: overcurrent relays.
Protects the generator against excessive
loads and faults on either side of the generator breaker.
9.9
Summary
Readers might easily get the impression from the material in this chap-
ter that interconnecting a DG installation to the distribution system is
fraught with Gordian knot–like entanglement power quality problems.
However, few problems can be expected for most DG applications in the
near future while the total penetration is relatively low. There is a sig-
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
433
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

nificant amount of DG that can be accommodated without affecting the
operation of the distribution system, but there is a limit. The grid is not
infinite in capacity.
As a general rule, problems begin to appear when the total intercon-
nected DG capacity approaches 15 percent of the feeder capacity.11,12
This might drop to as little as 5 percent of capacity on more rural feed-
ers or be as high as 30 percent if the DG is clustered near the substa-
tion. Voltage regulation problems are often the first to appear, followed
by interference with the utility fault-clearing process, which includes
concerns for islanding.
Changes can be made to accommodate nearly any amount of DG. As
the amount of DG increases, the simple, low-cost distribution system
design must be abandoned in favor of a more capable design. It will
almost certainly be more costly, but engineers can make it work.
Deciding who pays for it is another matter.
In a future of massively distributed generation, as some see it, com-
munications and control will be key. Today, most of the control of dis-
tribution systems is accomplished by local intelligence operating
autonomously. Systems with high penetrations of DG would benefit
greatly from fast, interconnected communications networks. This is
one technology shift that must accompany the spread of DG if it is to be
successful in contributing to reliable, high-quality electric power.
9.10
References
1. H. L. Willis and W. G. Scott, Distributed Power Generation Planning and Evaluation,
Marcel Dekker, New York, 2000.
2. N. Jenkins, R. Allan, P. Crossley, D. Kirschen, G. Strbac, Embedded Generation, The
Institute of Electrical Engineers, London, U.K., 2000.
3. W. E. Feero, W. B. Gish, “Overvoltages Caused by DSG Operation: Synchronous and
Induction Generators,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, January 1986, pp.
258–264.
4. R. C. Dugan, D. T. Rizy, Harmonic Considerations for Electric Distribution Feeders,
ORNL/Sub/81-95011/4, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. DOE, March 1988.
5. IEEE Standard 929-2000, Recommended Practice for Utility Interface of Photovoltaic
Systems.
6. R. C. Dugan, T. E. McDermott, “Operating Conflicts for Distributed Generation on
Distribution Systems,” IEEE IAS 2001 Rural Electric Power Conference Record,
IEEE Catalog No. 01CH37214, Little Rock, Ark., May 2001, Paper No. 01-A3.
7. Electrical Distribution-System Protection, 3d ed., Cooper Power Systems, Franksville,
Wis., 1990.
8. R. H. Hopkinson, “Ferroresonance Overvoltage Control Based on TNA Tests of
Three-Phase Delta-Wye Transformer Banks,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Apparatus and Systems, Vol. 86, No. 10, October 1967, pp. 1258–1265.
9. D. R. Smith, S. R. Swanson, J. D. Borst, “Overvoltages with Remotely-Switched
Cable-Fed Grounded Wye-Wye Transformers,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Apparatus and Systems, Vol. PAS-94, No. 5, September/October 1975, pp. 1843–1853.
10. IEEE Standard P1547, Distributed Resources Interconnected with Electric Power
Systems, Draft 8, P1547 Working Group of IEEE SCC 21, T. Basso, Secretary.
434
Chapter Nine
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

11. Protection of Electric Distribution Systems with Dispersed Storage and Generation
(DSG) Devices, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Report ORNL/CON-123, September
1983.
12. R. C. Dugan, T. E. McDermott, D. T. Rizy, S. Steffel, “Interconnecting Single-Phase
Backup Generation to the Utility Distribution System,” Transmission and
Distribution Conference and Exposition, 2001 IEEE/PES, Vol. 1, 2001, pp. 486–491.
9.11
Bibliography
Dugan, R. C., T. E. McDermott, G. J. Ball, “Distribution Planning for Distributed
Generation,” IEEE IAS Rural Electric Power Conference Record, IEEE Catalog No.
00CH37071, Louisville, Ky., May 7–9, 2000, pp. C4-1–C4-7.
Engineering Handbook for Dispersed Energy Systems on Utility Distribution Systems,
EPRI Final Report, TR-105589, November 1995.
Integration of Distributed Resources in Electric Utility Systems: Current Interconnection
Practice and Unified Approach, EPRI Final Report, TR-111489, November 1998.
“Interconnecting Distributed Generation to Utility Distribution Systems,” Short Course,
The Department of Engineering Professional Development, University of Wisconsin—
Madison, 2001.
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
435
Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Distributed Generation and Power Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

437
10
Wiring and Grounding
Many power quality variations that occur within customer facilities are
related to wiring and grounding problems. It is commonly stated at
power quality conferences and in journals that 80 percent of all the
power quality problems reported by customers are related to wiring
and grounding problems within a facility. While this may be an exag-
geration, many power quality problems are solved by simply tightening
a loose connection or replacing a corroded conductor. Therefore, an
evaluation of wiring and grounding practices is a necessary first step
when evaluating power quality problems in general.
The National Electrical Code® (NEC®)* and other important standards
provide the minimum standards for wiring and grounding. It is often
necessary to go beyond the requirements of these standards to achieve a
system that also minimizes the impact of power quality variations (har-
monics, transients, noise) on connected equipment. While the intent of
this book is to concentrate on subjects that are more amenable to engi-
neering analysis, the basic principles of wiring and grounding are pre-
sented in this chapter to provide the reader with at least a fundamental
understanding of why things are done. References are provided through-
out the text for readers interested in further details.
10.1
Resources
Selected definitions are presented here from the IEEE Dictionary
(Standard 100), the IEEE Green Book (IEEE Standard 142), and the
NEC. These are the fundamental resources on wiring and grounding.
The IEEE Green Book and the NEC provide extensive information on
Chapter
*National Electrical Code® and NEC® are registered trademarks of the National Fire
Protection Association, Inc., Quincy, Mass. 02269.
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

proper grounding practices for safety considerations and proper system
operation. However, these documents do not address concerns for
power quality.
Power quality considerations associated with wiring and grounding
practices are covered in Federal Information Processing Standard
(FIPS) 94, Guideline on Electrical Power for ADP Installations (1983).
This is the original source of much of the information interpreted and
summarized here.
The IEEE Emerald Book (ANSI/IEEE Standard 1100-1992, IEEE
Recommended Practice for Powering and Grounding Sensitive
Electronic Equipment) updates the information presented in FIPS 94.
This is an excellent resource for wiring and grounding with respect to
power quality issues and is highly recommended.
Grounding guidelines to minimize noise in electronic circuits are also
covered in IEEE Standard 518, IEEE Guide for the Installation of
Electrical Equipment to Minimize Electrical Noise Inputs to Controllers
from External Sources. EPRI’s Wiring and Grounding for Power
Quality (Publication CU.2026.3.90) provides an excellent summary of
typical wiring and grounding problems along with recommended solu-
tions. Additional resources are provided in the Bibliography at the end
of this chapter.
10.2
Definitions
Some of the key definitions of wiring and grounding terms from these
documents are included here.
IEEE Dictionary (Standard 100) definition*
grounding
A conducting connection, whether intentional or accidental, by
which an electric circuit or equipment is connected to the earth, or to some
conducting body of relatively large extent that serves in place of the earth.
It is used for establishing and maintaining the potential of the earth (or of
the conducting body) or approximately that potential, on conductors con-
nected to it; and for conducting ground current to and from the earth (or the
conducting body).
IEEE Green Book (IEEE Standard 142) definitions*
438
Chapter Ten
*Reprinted from IEEE Standard 100-1992, IEEE Standard Dictionary of Electrical and
Electronic Terms, copyright © 1993 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
Inc. The IEEE disclaims any responsibility or liability resulting from the placement and
use in this publication. Information is reprinted with the permission of the IEEE.
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ungrounded system
A system, circuit, or apparatus without an intentional
connection to ground, except through potential indicating or measuring devices
or other very high impedance devices.
grounded system
A system of conductors in which at least one conductor or
point (usually the middle wire or neutral point of transformer or generator
windings) is intentionally grounded, either solidly or through an impedance.
grounded solidly
Connected directly through an adequate ground connection
in which no impedance has been intentionally inserted.
grounded effectively
Grounded through a sufficiently low impedance such that
for all system conditions the ratio of zero sequence reactance to positive sequence
reactance (X0/X1) is positive and less than 3, and the ratio of zero sequence resis-
tance to positive sequence reactance (R0/X1) is positive and less than 1.
resistance grounded
Grounded through impedance, the principal element of
which is resistance.
inductance grounded
Grounded through impedance, the principal element
of which is inductance.
NEC definitions.†
Refer to Fig. 10.1.
grounding electrode
The grounding electrode shall be as near as practicable
to and preferably in the same area as the grounding conductor connection to
the system. The grounding electrode shall be: (1) the nearest available effec-
tively grounded structural metal member of the structure; or (2) the nearest
available effectively grounded metal water pipe; or (3) other electrodes (Section
250-81 & 250-83) where electrodes specified in (1) and (2) are not available.
grounded
Connected to earth or to some conducting body that serves in place
of the earth.
grounded conductor
A system or circuit conductor that is intentionally
grounded (the neutral is normally referred to as the grounded conductor).
grounding conductor
A conductor used to connect equipment or the
grounded circuit of a wiring system to a grounding electrode or electrodes.
Wiring and Grounding
439
*Reprinted from IEEE Standard 142-1991, IEEE Recommended Practice for
Grounding of Industrial and Commerical Power Systems, copyright © 1991 by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. The IEEE disclaims any responsi-
bility or liability resulting from the placement and use in this publication. Information is
reprinted with the permission of the IEEE.
†Reprinted with permission from NFPA 70-1993, the National Electrical Code®, copy-
right © 1993, National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, Mass. 02269. This
reprinted material is not the complete and official position of the National Fire
Protection Association on the referenced subject, which is represented only by the stan-
dard in its entirety.
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

grounding conductor, equipment
The conductor used to connect the noncur-
rent-carrying metal parts of equipment, raceways, and other enclosures to the
system grounded conductor and/or the grounding electrode conductor at the
service equipment or at the source of a separately derived system.
grounding electrode conductor
The conductor used to connect the ground-
ing electrode to the equipment grounding conductor and/or to the grounded
conductor of the circuit at the service equipment or at the source of a separately
derived system.
grounding electrode system
Defined in NEC Section 250-81 as including: (a)
metal underground water pipe; (b) metal frame of the building; (c) concrete-
encased electrode; and (d) ground ring. When these elements are available,
they are required to be bonded together to form the grounding electrode sys-
tem. Where a metal underground water pipe is the only grounding electrode
available, it must be supplemented by one of the grounding electrodes specified
in Section 250-81 or 250-83.
bonding jumper, main
The connector between the grounded circuit conductor
(neutral) and the equipment grounding conductor at the service entrance.
branch circuit
The circuit conductors between the final overcurrent device
protecting the circuit and the outlets.
conduit enclosure bond
(bonding definition) The permanent joining of
metallic parts to form an electrically conductive path, which will assure elec-
trical continuity and the capacity to conduct safely any current likely to be
imposed.
feeder
All circuit conductors between the service equipment of the source of
a separately derived system and the final branch circuit overcurrent device.
440
Chapter Ten
N
G
N
G
BOND
NEC 250-26(e)
GROUNDING-ELECTRODE
CONDUCTOR
NEC 250-26(b)
GROUNDING ELECTRODE
NEC 250-26(c)
EARTH OR SOME CONDUCTING MATERIAL
EQUIPMENT GROUNDING
CONDUCTORS
G
N
L1
LOAD
INSULATED
NEUTRAL
METALLIC
CONDUCTOR
ENCLOSURE
NEC 250-91(b)
SYSTEM
OVERCURRENT
PROTECTION
SUPPLY
Figure 10.1
Terminology used in NEC definitions.
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

outlet
A point on the wiring system at which current is taken to supply uti-
lization equipment.
overcurrent
Any current in excess of the rated current of equipment or the
capacity of a conductor. It may result from overload, short circuit, or ground fault.
panel board
A single panel or group of panel units designed for assembly in
the form of a single panel; including buses, automatic overcurrent devices, and
with or without switches for the control of light, heat, or power circuits;
designed to be placed in a cabinet or cutout box placed in or against a wall or
partition and accessible only from the front.
separately derived systems
A premises wiring system whose power is
derived from a generator, a transformer, or converter windings and has no
direct electrical connection, including a solidly connected grounded circuit con-
ductor, to supply conductors originating in another system.
service equipment
The necessary equipment, usually consisting of a circuit
breaker switch and fuses, and their accessories, located near the point of
entrance of supply conductors to a building or other structure, or an otherwise
defined area, and intended to constitute the main control and means of cutoff
of the supply.
ufer ground
A method of grounding or connection to the earth in which the
reinforcing steel (rebar) of the building, especially at the ground floor, serves as
a grounding electrode.
10.3
Reasons for Grounding
The most important reason for grounding is safety. Two important
aspects to grounding requirements with respect to safety and one with
respect to power quality are
1. Personnel safety.
Personnel safety is the primary reason that all
equipment must have a safety equipment ground. This is designed to
prevent the possibility of high touch voltages when there is a fault in a
piece of equipment (Fig. 10.2). The touch voltage is the voltage between
any two conducting surfaces that can be simultaneously touched by an
individual. The earth may be one of these surfaces.
There should be no “floating” panels or enclosures in the vicinity of
electric circuits. In the event of insulation failure or inadvertent appli-
cation of moisture, any electric charge which appears on a panel, enclo-
sure, or raceway must be drained to “ground” or to an object which is
reliably grounded.
2. Grounding to assure protective device operation.
A ground fault
return path to the point where the power source neutral conductor is
grounded is an essential safety feature. The NEC and some local wiring
codes permit electrically continuous conduit and wiring device enclo-
sures to serve as this ground return path. Some codes require the con-
Wiring and Grounding
441
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

duit to be supplemented with a bare or insulated conductor included
with the other power conductors.
An insulation failure or other fault that allows a phase wire to make
contact with an enclosure will find a low-impedance path back to the
power source neutral. The resulting overcurrent will cause the circuit
breaker or fuse to disconnect the faulted circuit promptly.
NEC Article 250-51 states that an effective grounding path (the path
to ground from circuits, equipment, and conductor enclosures) shall
a. Be permanent and continuous
b. Have the capacity to conduct safely any fault current likely to be
imposed on it
c. Have sufficiently low impedance to limit the voltage to ground and
to facilitate the operation of the circuit protective devices in the
circuit
d. Not have the earth as the sole equipment ground conductor
3. Noise control.
Noise control includes transients from all sources.
This is where grounding relates to power quality. Grounding for safety
reasons defines the minimum requirements for a grounding system.
Anything that is done to the grounding system to improve the noise
performance must be done in addition to the minimum requirements
defined in the NEC and local codes.
The primary objective of grounding for noise control is to create an
equipotential ground system. Potential differences between different
ground locations can stress insulation, create circulating ground cur-
rents in low-voltage cables, and interfere with sensitive equipment
that may be grounded in multiple locations.
Ground voltage equalization of voltage differences between parts of
an automated data processing (ADP) grounding system is accomplished
in part when the equipment grounding conductors are connected to the
grounding point of a single power source. However, if the equipment
grounding conductors are long, it is difficult to achieve a constant poten-
442
Chapter Ten
Line
Neutral
Safety Ground
System Ground
Fault
Load
Dangerous
Touch
Potential
Ungrounded
Cabinet
Figure 10.2
High touch voltage created by improper grounding.
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tial throughout the grounding system, particularly for high-frequency
noise. Supplemental conductors, ground grids, low-inductance ground
plates, etc., may be needed for improving the power quality. These must
be used in addition to the equipment ground conductors, which are
required for safety, and not as a replacement for them.
10.4
Typical Wiring and Grounding
Problems
Sections 10.4.1 to 10.4.7 describe some typical power quality problems
that are due to inadequacies in the wiring and grounding of electrical
systems. It is useful to be aware of these typical problems when per-
forming site surveys because many of the problems can be detected
through simple observations. Other problems require measurements of
voltages, currents, or impedances in the circuits.
10.4.1
Problems with conductors and
connectors
One of the first things to be done during a site survey is to inspect the
service entrance, main panel, and major subpanels for problems with
conductors or connections. A bad connection (faulty, loose, or resistive)
will result in heating, possible arcing, and burning of insulation. Table
10.1 summarizes some of the wiring problems that can be uncovered
during a site survey.
Wiring and Grounding
443
TABLE 10.1
Problems with Conductors and Connectors
Problem observed
Possible cause
Burnt smell at the panel, 
Faulted conductor, 
junction box, or load 
bad connection, arcing, or 
equipment
overloaded wiring
Panel or junction box 
Faulty circuit breaker
is warm to the touch
or bad connection
Buzzing (corona effect)
Arcing
Scorched insulation
Overloaded wiring, faulted 
conductor, or bad connection
No voltage at load 
Tripped breaker, bad connection, 
equipment
or faulted conductor
Intermittent voltage at 
Bad connection or arcing
load equipment
Scorched panel or 
Bad connection or faulted conductor
junction box
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

10.4.2
Missing safety ground
If the safety ground is missing, a fault in the equipment from the phase
conductor to the enclosure results in line potential on the exposed sur-
faces of the equipment. No breakers will trip, and a hazardous situa-
tion results (see Fig. 10.2).
10.4.3
Multiple neutral-to-ground
connections
Unless there is a separately derived system, the only neutral-to-ground
bond should be at the service entrance. The neutral and ground should
be kept separate at all panel boards and junction boxes. Downline neu-
tral-to-ground bonds result in parallel paths for the load return current
where one of the paths becomes the ground circuit. This can cause
misoperation of protective devices. Also, during a fault condition, the
fault current will split between the ground and the neutral, which
could prevent proper operation of protective devices (a serious safety
concern). This is a direct violation of the NEC.
10.4.4
Ungrounded equipment
Isolated grounds are sometimes used due to the perceived notion of
obtaining a “clean” ground. The proper procedure for using an isolated
ground must be followed (see Sec. 10.5.5). Procedures that involve hav-
ing an illegal insulating bushing in the power source conduit and
replacing the prescribed equipment grounding conductor with one to
an “isolated dedicated computer ground” are dangerous, violate code,
and are unlikely to solve noise problems.
10.4.5
Additional ground rods
Ground rods should be part of a facility grounding system and con-
nected where all the building grounding electrodes (building steel,
metal water pipe, etc.) are bonded together. Multiple ground rods can
be bused together at the service entrance to reduce the overall ground
resistance. Isolated grounds can be used for sensitive equipment, as
described previously. However, these should not include isolated
ground rods to establish a new ground reference for the equipment.
One very important power quality problem with additional ground rods
is that they create additional paths for lightning stroke currents to
flow. With the ground rod at the service entrance, any lightning stroke
current reaching the facility goes to ground at the service entrance and
the ground potential of the whole facility rises together. With addi-
tional ground rods, a portion of the lightning stroke current will flow on
the building wiring (green ground conductor and/or conduit) to reach
444
Chapter Ten
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the additional ground rods. This creates a possible transient voltage
problem for equipment and a possible overload problem for the con-
ductors.
10.4.6
Ground loops
Ground loops are one of the most important grounding problems in
many commercial and industrial environments that include data pro-
cessing and communication equipment. If two devices are grounded via
different paths and a communication cable between the devices pro-
vides another ground connection between them, a ground loop results.
Slightly different potentials in the two power system grounds can cause
circulating currents in this ground loop if there is indeed a complete
path. Even if there is not a complete path, the insulation that is pre-
venting current flow may flash over because the communication circuit
insulation levels are generally quite low.
Likewise, very low magnitudes of circulating current can cause
serious noise problems. The best solution to this problem in many
cases is to use optical couplers in the communication lines, thereby
eliminating the ground loop and providing adequate insulation to
withstand transient overvoltages. When this is not practical, the
grounded conductors in the signal cable may have to be supplemented
with heavier conductors or better shielding. Equipment on both ends
of the cable should be protected with arresters in addition to the
improved grounding because of the coupling that can still occur into
signal circuits.
10.4.7
Insufficient neutral conductor
Switch-mode power supplies and fluorescent lighting with electronic
ballasts are widely used in commercial environments. The high third-
harmonic content present in these load currents can have a very impor-
tant impact on the required neutral conductor rating for the supply
circuits.
Third-harmonic currents in a balanced system appear in the zero-
sequence circuit. This means that third-harmonic currents from three
single-phase loads will add in the neutral, rather than cancel as is the
case for the 60-Hz current. In typical commercial buildings with a
diversity of switched-mode power supply loads, the neutral current is
typically in the range 140 to 170 percent of the fundamental frequency
phase current magnitude.
The possible solutions to neutral conductor overloading include the
following:
■Run a separate neutral conductor for each phase in a three-phase cir-
cuit that serves single-phase nonlinear loads.
Wiring and Grounding
445
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■When a shared neutral must be used in a three-phase circuit with
single-phase nonlinear loads, the neutral conductor capacity should
be approximately double the phase conductor capacity.
■Delta-wye transformers (see Sec. 10.5.6) designed for nonlinear loads
can be used to limit the penetration of high neutral currents. These
transformers should be placed as close as possible to the nonlinear
loads (e.g., in the computer room). The neutral conductors on the sec-
ondary of each separately derived system must be rated based on the
expected neutral current magnitudes.
■Filters to control the third-harmonic current that can be placed at
the individual loads are becoming available. These will be an alter-
native in existing installations where changing the wiring may be an
expensive proposition.
■Zigzag transformers provide a low impedance for zero-sequence har-
monic currents and, like filters, can be placed at various places along
the three-phase circuit to shorten the path of third-harmonic currents
and better disperse them.
10.5
Solutions to Wiring and Grounding
Problems
10.5.1
Proper grounding practices
Figure 10.3 illustrates the basic elements of a properly grounded elec-
trical system. The important elements of the electrical system grounding
are described in Secs. 10.5.2 to 10.5.5.
446
Chapter Ten
N
N
SERVICE
TRANSFORMER
FEEDER
PANEL
BOARD
BRANCH
CIRCUIT
LOAD
Receptacle
Conduit/Enclosure
Building
Grounding
Electrode
Grounding-
Electrode
Conductor
BUILDING
SERVICE
EQUIPMENT
Bonding
Jumper
Grounding
Electrode
Grounded
Service
Conductor
Phase Conductor
(Hot)
Grounded Conductor
(Neutral)
Insulated
Ground Conductor
(Green Wire)
G
G
Figure 10.3
Basic elements of a properly grounded electrical system.
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

10.5.2
Ground electrode (rod)
The ground rod provides the electrical connection from the power sys-
tem ground to earth. The item of primary interest in evaluating the
adequacy of the ground rod is the resistance of this connection. There
are three basic components of resistance in a ground rod:
■Electrode resistance.
Resistance due to the physical connection of
the grounding wire to the grounding rod.
■Rod-earth contact resistance.
Resistance due to the interface
between the soil and the rod. This resistance is inversely propor-
tional to the surface area of the grounding rod (i.e., more area of con-
tact means lower resistance).
■Ground resistance.
Resistance due to the resistivity of the soil in
the vicinity of the grounding rod. The soil resistivity varies over a
wide range, depending on the soil type and moisture content.
The resistance of the ground-rod connection is important because it
influences transient voltage levels during switching events and light-
ning transients. High-magnitude currents during lightning strokes
result in a voltage across the resistance, raising the ground reference
for the entire facility. The difference in voltage between the ground ref-
erence and true earth ground will appear at grounded equipment
within the facility, and this can result in dangerous touch potentials.
10.5.3
Service entrance connections
The primary components of a properly grounded system are found at
the service entrance. The neutral point of the supply power system is
connected to the grounded conductor (neutral wire) at this point. This
is also the one location in the system (except in the case of a separately
derived system) where the grounded conductor is connected to the
ground conductor (green wire) via the bonding jumper. The ground con-
ductor is also connected to the building grounding electrode via the
grounding-electrode conductor at the service entrance. For most effec-
tive grounding, the grounding-electrode conductor should be exother-
mically welded at both ends.
The grounding-electrode conductor is sized based on guidelines in
the NEC (Section 250-94). NEC table 250-94 (reproduced in Table 10.2)
provides the basic guidelines.
There are a number of options for the building grounding electrode.
It is important that all of the different grounding electrodes used in a
building are connected together at the service entrance. The following
are permissible for use as grounding electrodes:
■Underground water pipe.
(See NEC table 250-94 for grounding-
electrode conductor requirements for connection to the neutral bus.)
Wiring and Grounding
447
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Building steel.
(See NEC table 250-94 for grounding-electrode con-
ductor requirements for connection to the neutral bus or the under-
ground water pipe.)
■Ground ring.
A ground ring can be used in addition to building steel
to provide a better equipotential ground for the grounding electrode.
It is connected to the main grounding electrode with a conductor that
is not larger than the ground ring conductor.
■Concrete encased electrode.
This can serve a similar purpose to a
ground ring and is connected to the main grounding electrode with a
conductor that has a minimum size of #4 AWG.
■Ground rod.
The ground rod is connected to the main building ground-
ing electrode with a conductor that has a minimum size of #6 AWG.
Throughout the system, a safety ground must be maintained to
ensure that all exposed conductors that may be touched are kept at an
equal potential. This safety ground also provides a ground fault return
path to the point where the power source neutral conductor is
grounded. The safety ground can consist of the conduit itself or the con-
duit and a separate conductor (ground conductor or green wire) in the
conduit. This safety ground originates at the service entrance and is
carried throughout the building.
10.5.4
Panel board
The panel board is the point in the system where the various branch
circuits are supplied by a feeder from the service entrance. The panel
448
Chapter Ten
TABLE 10.2
Grounding-Electrode Conductor for AC Systems
Size of largest service entrance
conductor or equivalent area for
Size of grounding-
parallel conductors
electrode conductor
Aluminum or
Aluminum or 
copper-clad 
copper-clad 
Copper
aluminum
Copper
aluminum
2 or smaller
0 or smaller
8
6
1 or 0
2/0 or 3/0
6
4
2/0 or 3/0
4/0 or 250 MCM*
4
2
Over 3/0–
Over 250 MCM–
2
0
350 MCM
500 MCM
Over 350 MCM–
Over 500 MCM–
0
3/0
600 MCM
900 MCM
Over 600 MCM–
Over 900 MCM–
2/0
4/0
1100 MCM
1750 MCM
Over 1100 MCM
Over 1750 MCM
3/0
250 MCM
*MCM  million circular mil (unit of wire size).
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

board provides breakers in series with the phase conductors; connects
the grounded conductor (neutral) of the branch circuit to that of the
feeder circuit; and connects the ground conductor (green wire) to the
feeder ground conductor, conduit, and enclosure. It is important to note
that there should not be a neutral-to-ground connection at the panel
board. This neutral-to-ground connection is prohibited in the NEC as it
would result in load return currents flowing in the ground path
between the panel board and the service entrance. In order to maintain
an equipotential grounding system, the ground path should not contain
any load return current. Also, fault currents would split between the
neutral conductor and the ground return path. Protection is based on
the fault current flowing in the ground path.
10.5.5
Isolated ground
The noise performance of the supply to sensitive loads can sometimes
be improved by providing an isolated ground to the load. This is done
using isolated ground receptacles, which are orange in color. If an iso-
lated ground receptacle is being used downline from the panel board,
the isolated ground conductor is not connected to the conduit or enclo-
sure in the panel board, but only to the ground conductor of the supply
feeder (Fig. 10.4). The conduit is the safety ground in this case and is
connected to the enclosure. A separate conductor can also be used for
the safety ground in addition to the conduit. This technique is
described in the NEC, Article 274, Exception 4 on receptacles. It is not
described as a grounding technique.
The isolated ground receptacle is orange in color for identification
purposes. This receptacle does not have the ground conductor con-
nected to the receptacle enclosure or conduit. The isolated ground con-
ductor may pass back through several panel boards without being
Wiring and Grounding
449
N
N
SERVICE
TRANSFORMER
FEEDER
PANEL
BOARD
BRANCH
CIRCUIT
LOAD
Isolated Ground
Receptacle
(Orange in Color)
Conduit/Enclosure
Building
Grounding
Electrode
Grounding-
Electrode
Conductor
BUILDING
SERVICE
EQUIPMENT
Bonding
Jumper
Grounding
Electrode
Grounded
Service
Conductor
Phase Conductor
(Hot)
Grounded Conductor
(Neutral)
Insulated
Ground Conductor
(Green Wire)
IG
G
Figure 10.4
Grounding configuration for an isolated ground.
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

connected to local ground until grounded at the service entrance or
other separately derived ground. The use of isolated ground receptacles
requires careful wiring practices to avoid unintentional connections
between the isolated ground and the safety ground. In general, dedi-
cated branch circuits accomplish the same objective as isolated ground
receptacles without the concern for complicated wiring.
A special case of isolated grounds is used for grounding some hospi-
tal equipment. These procedures are described in the NEC and in the
White Book (IEEE Standard 602).
10.5.6
Separately derived systems
A separately derived system has a ground reference that is indepen-
dent from other systems. A common example of this is a delta-wye
isolation transformer (Fig. 10.5). The wye-connected secondary neutral
is connected to local building ground (not a separate ground rod) to pro-
vide a new ground reference independent from the rest of the system.
The point in the system where this new ground reference is defined is
like a service entrance in that the system neutral is connected to the
grounded conductor (neutral wire), which is connected to the ground
conductor with a bonding jumper.
Separately derived systems are used to provide a local ground refer-
ence for sensitive loads. The local ground reference can have signifi-
cantly reduced noise levels as compared to the system ground if an
isolation transformer is used to supply the separately derived system.
An additional benefit is that neutral currents are localized to the load
side of the separately derived system. This can help reduce neutral
450
Chapter Ten
N
N
G
N
SERVICE
TRANSFORMER
FEEDER
PANEL
BOARD
BRANCH
CIRCUIT
SEPARATELY
DERIVED
SYSTEM
LOAD
Receptacle
Conduit/Enclosure
Building
Grounding
Electrode
Grounding-
Electrode
Conductor
BUILDING
SERVICE
EQUIPMENT
Bonding
Jumper
Grounding
Electrode
Grounded
Service
Conductor
Phase Conductor
(Hot)
Grounded Conductor
(Neutral)
Insulated
Ground Conductor
(Green Wire)
(Optional)
Cold-Water Pipe
or Building Steel
(Not Separate
Ground Rod)
G
G
Figure 10.5
Configuration for a separately derived system.
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

current magnitudes in the overall system when there are large numbers
of single-phase nonlinear loads.
10.5.7
Grounding techniques for signal
reference
Most of the grounding requirements previously described deal with the
concerns for safety and proper operation of protective devices.
Grounding is also used to provide a signal reference point for equip-
ment exchanging signals over communication or control circuits within
a facility. The requirements for a signal reference ground are often sig-
nificantly different from the requirements for a safety ground.
However, the safety ground requirements must always be considered
first whenever designing a grounding scheme.
The most important characteristic of a signal reference ground is that
it must have a low impedance over a wide range of frequencies. One way
to accomplish this (at least for low frequencies) is to use an adequately
sized ground conductor. Conduit is particularly bad for a signal reference
ground because it relies on continuity of connections and the impedance
is high relative to the phase and neutral conductors. Undersized ground
conductors have the same problem of high impedance. For reducing
power quality problems, the ground conductor should be at least the
same size as the phase conductors and the neutral conductor (the neu-
tral conductor may need to be larger than the phase conductors in some
special cases involving nonlinear single-phase loads).
As frequency increases, the wavelength becomes short enough to
cause resonances for relatively short lengths of wire. A good rule of
thumb is that when the length of the ground conductor is greater than
one-twentieth of the signal wavelength, the ground conductor is no
longer effective at that frequency. Since the grounding system is more
complicated than a simple conductor, there is actually a complicated
impedance versus frequency characteristic involved (Fig. 10.6).
One way to provide a signal reference ground to sensitive equipment
that is effective over a wide range of frequencies (0 to 30 MHz) is to use
a signal reference grid or zero reference grid (Fig. 10.7). This technique
uses a rectangular mesh of copper wire with about 2-ft spacing. It is com-
monly applied in large data-processing equipment rooms. Even if a por-
tion of the conductor system is in resonance at a particular frequency,
there will always be other paths of the grid that are not in resonance due
to the multiple paths available for current to flow. When using a signal
reference grid, the enclosure of each piece of equipment must still be con-
nected to a single common ground via the ground conductor (NEC
requirement). The enclosures may also be connected to the closest inter-
connection of the grid to provide a high-frequency, low-impedance signal
reference. Figure 10.6 illustrates the effect of the signal reference grid on
the overall ground impedance versus frequency characteristic.
Wiring and Grounding
451
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

452
Chapter Ten
10.5.8
More on grounding for sensitive
equipment
The following practices are appropriate for any installation with equip-
ment that may be sensitive to noise or disturbances introduced due to
coupling in the ground system:
■Whenever possible, use individual branch circuits to power sensitive
equipment. Individual branch circuits provide good isolation for
high-frequency transients and noise.
■Conduit should never be the sole source of grounding for sensitive
equipment (even though it may be legal). Currents flowing on the
conduit can cause interference with communications and electronics.
■Green-wire grounds should be the same size as the current-carrying
conductors, and the individual circuit conduit should be bonded at
both ends.
■Use building steel as a ground reference, whenever available. The
building steel usually provides an excellent, low-impedance ground
reference for a building. Additional ground electrodes (water pipes,
etc.) can be used as supplemental to the building steel.
These practices are often applied in computer rooms, where the fre-
quency response of the grounding system is even more important due
to communication requirements between different parts of a computer
system:
■Either install a signal reference grid under a raised floor or use the
raised floor as a signal reference grid. This is not a replacement for
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Green Wire &
Signal Reference Grid
Green Wire Only
Impedance, 
Frequency, MHz
0
50
100
150
200
Figure 10.6
Effect of signal reference grid on ground impedance.
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the safety ground, but augments the safety ground for noise reduc-
tion.
■Add a transient suppression plate at or near the power entry point
(with the power cabling laid on top of it) to provide a controlled capaci-
tive and magnetic coupling noise bypass between building reinforced
steel and the electrical ground conductors.
10.5.9
Summary of wiring and grounding
solutions
The grounding system should be designed to accomplish these mini-
mum objectives:
1. There should never be load currents flowing in the grounding sys-
tem under normal operating conditions. One can likely measure
very small currents in the grounding system due to inductive cou-
pling, capacitive coupling, and the connection of surge suppressors
and the like. In fact, if the ground current is exactly zero, there is
probably an open ground connection. However, these currents
should be only a tiny fraction of the load currents.
2. There should be, as near as possible, an equipotential reference for
all devices and locations in the system.
3. To avoid excessive touch potential safety risks, the housings of all
equipment and enclosures should be connected to the equipotential
grounding system.
Wiring and Grounding
453
L1
L2
L3
N
G
H1
H2
H3
Sensitive
Equipment
Incoming
Utility
Service
Optional
Strap
Raised Floor Supporting Structure
Used as a Signal Reference Grid
Figure 10.7
Use of a signal reference grid
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The most important implications resulting from these objectives are:
1. There can only be one neutral-to-ground bond for any subsystem. A
separately derived system may be created with a transformer, which
establishes a new neutral-to-ground bond.
2. There must be sufficient interconnections in the equipotential plane
to achieve a low impedance over a wide frequency range.
3. All equipment and enclosures should be grounded.
10.6
Bibliography
In addition to the standard reference books cited early, the following
books are recommended for further reading on this subject:
Hasse, P., Overvoltage Protection of Low Voltage Systems, IEE Power Series 12, Peter
Peregrinus, Ltd., London, 1992.
Mardiguian, Michael, A
Handbook Series on Electromagnetic Interference and
Compatibility, Vol. 2, Grounding and Bonding, Interference Control Technologies, Inc.,
Gainesville, Va., 1988.
Morrison, Ralph, and Warren H. Lewis, Grounding and Shielding for Facilities, John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1990.
Ott, Henry W., Noise Reduction Techniques in Electronic Systems, 2d ed., John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 1988.
454
Chapter Ten
Wiring and Grounding
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

455
Power Quality Monitoring
Power quality monitoring is the process of gathering, analyzing, and
interpreting raw measurement data into useful information. The
process of gathering data is usually carried out by continuous mea-
surement of voltage and current over an extended period. The process
of analysis and interpretation has been traditionally performed manu-
ally, but recent advances in signal processing and artificial intelligence
fields have made it possible to design and implement intelligent sys-
tems to automatically analyze and interpret raw data into useful infor-
mation with minimum human intervention.
Power quality monitoring programs are often driven by the demand
for improving the systemwide power quality performance. Many indus-
trial and commercial customers have equipment that is sensitive to
power disturbances, and, therefore, it is more important to understand
the quality of power being provided. Examples of these facilities
include computer networking and telecommunication facilities, semi-
conductor and electronics manufacturing facilities, biotechnology and
pharmaceutical laboratories, and financial data-processing centers.
Hence, in the last decade many utility companies have implemented
extensive power quality monitoring programs.
In this chapter, various issues relating to power quality monitoring are
described. Section 11.1 details the objectives and procedures for perform-
ing monitoring. Section 11.2 provides historical perspective on various
monitoring instruments. Section 11.3 provides a description of various
power quality monitoring instruments and their typical functions.
Section 11.4 describes methods of assessment of power quality data.
Section 11.5 details the applications of intelligent systems in automating
analysis and interpretation of raw power quality measurement data.
Section 11.6 reviews standards dealing with power quality monitoring.
Chapter
11
Source: Electrical Power Systems Quality
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

11.1
Monitoring Considerations
Before embarking on any power quality monitoring effort, one should
clearly define the monitoring objectives. The monitoring objectives
often determine the choice of monitoring equipment, triggering thresh-
olds, methods for data acquisition and storage, and analysis and inter-
pretation requirements. Several common objectives of power quality
monitoring are summarized here.
Monitoring to characterize system performance.
This is the most general
requirement. A power producer may find this objective important if it
has the need to understand its system performance and then match
that system performance with the needs of customers. System charac-
terization is a proactive approach to power quality monitoring. By
understanding the normal power quality performance of a system, a
provider can quickly identify problems and can offer information to its
customers to help them match their sensitive equipment’s characteris-
tics with realistic power quality characteristics.
Monitoring to characterize specific problems.
Many power quality ser-
vice departments or plant managers solve problems by performing
short-term monitoring at specific customer sites or at difficult loads.
This is a reactive mode of power quality monitoring, but it frequently
identifies the cause of equipment incompatibility, which is the first step
to a solution.
Monitoring as part of an enhanced power quality service.
Many power
producers are currently considering additional services to offer cus-
tomers. One of these services would be to offer differentiated levels of
power quality to match the needs of specific customers. A provider and
customer can together achieve this goal by modifying the power system
or by installing equipment within the customer’s premises. In either
case, monitoring becomes essential to establish the benchmarks for the
differentiated service and to verify that the utility achieves contracted
levels of power quality.
Monitoring as part of predictive or just-in-time maintenance.
Power qual-
ity data gathered over time can be analyzed to provide information
relating to specific equipment performance. For example, a repetitive
arcing fault from an underground cable may signify impending cable
failure, or repetitive capacitor-switching restrikes may signify impend-
ing failure on the capacitor-switching device. Equipment maintenance
can be quickly ordered to avoid catastrophic failure, thus preventing
major power quality disturbances which ultimately will impact overall
power quality performance.
456
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The monitoring program must be designed based on the appropriate
objectives, and it must make the information available in a convenient
form and in a timely manner (i.e., immediately). The most comprehen-
sive monitoring approach will be a permanently installed monitoring
system with automatic collection of information about steady-state
power quality conditions and energy use as well as disturbances.
11.1.1
Monitoring as part of a facility site
survey
Site surveys are performed to evaluate concerns for power quality and
equipment performance throughout a facility. The survey will include
inspection of wiring and grounding concerns, equipment connections,
and the voltage and current characteristics throughout the facility.
Power quality monitoring, along with infrared scans and visual inspec-
tions, is an important part of the overall survey.
The initial site survey should be designed to obtain as much informa-
tion as possible about the customer facility. This information is espe-
cially important when the monitoring objective is intended to address
specific power quality problems. This information is summarized here.
1. Nature of the problems (data loss, nuisance trips, component fail-
ures, control system malfunctions, etc.)
2. Characteristics of the sensitive equipment experiencing problems
(equipment design information or at least application guide infor-
mation)
3. The times at which problems occur
4. Coincident problems or known operations (e.g., capacitor switching)
that occur at the same time
5. Possible sources of power quality variations within the facility
(motor starting, capacitor switching, power electronic equipment
operation, arcing equipment, etc.)
6. Existing power conditioning equipment being used
7. Electrical system data (one-line diagrams, transformer sizes and
impedances, load information, capacitor information, cable data, etc.)
Once these basic data have been obtained through discussions with
the customer, a site survey should be performed to verify the one-line
diagrams, electrical system data, wiring and grounding integrity, load
levels, and basic power quality characteristics. Data forms that can be
used for this initial verification of the power distribution system are
provided in Figs. 11.1 to 11.4. They can be used to organize the power
quality monitoring results from throughout the facility.
Power Quality Monitoring
457
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

11.1.2
Determining what to monitor
Power quality encompasses a wide variety of conditions on the power sys-
tem. Important disturbances can range from very high frequency
impulses caused by lightning strokes or current chopping during circuit
interruptions to long-term overvoltages caused by a regulator tap switch-
ing problem. The range of conditions that must be characterized creates
challenges both in terms of the monitoring equipment performance spec-
ifications and in the data-collection requirements. Chapter 2 details var-
458
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.1
Form for recording supply transformer test data.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

ious categories of power quality variations along with methods for char-
acterizing the variations and the typical causes of the disturbances.
The methods for characterizing the quality of ac power are important
for the monitoring requirements. For instance, characterizing most tran-
sients requires high-frequency sampling of the actual waveform. Voltage
sags can be characterized with a plot of the rms voltage versus time.
Outages can be defined simply by a time duration. Monitoring to char-
acterize harmonic distortion levels and normal voltage variations
requires steady-state sampling with results analysis of trends over time.
Extensive monitoring of all the different types of power quality vari-
ations at many locations may be rather costly in terms of hardware,
communications charges, data management, and report preparation.
Hence, the priorities for monitoring should be determined based on the
objectives of the effort. Projects to benchmark system performance
should involve a reasonably complete monitoring effort. Projects
designed to evaluate compliance with IEEE Standard 519-1992 for har-
monic distortion levels may only require steady-state monitoring of
harmonic levels. Other projects focused on specific industrial problems
may only require monitoring of rms variations, such as voltage sags.
Power Quality Monitoring
459
Figure 11.2
Form for recording feeder circuit test data (from panel).
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

460
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.3
Form for recording branch circuit test data (from panel).
Figure 11.4
Form for recording test data at individual loads.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

11.1.3
Choosing monitoring locations
Obviously, we would like to monitor conditions at virtually all locations
throughout the system to completely understand the overall power
quality. However, such monitoring may be prohibitively expensive and
there are challenges in data management, analysis, and interpreta-
tion. Fortunately, taking measurements from all possible locations is
usually not necessary since measurements taken from several strate-
gic locations can be used to determine characteristics of the overall sys-
tem. Thus, it is very important that the monitoring locations be
selected carefully based on the monitoring objectives. We now present
examples of how to choose a monitoring location.
The monitoring experience gained from the EPRI DPQ project1 pro-
vides an excellent example of how to choose monitoring locations. The
primary objective of the DPQ project was to characterize power quality
on the U.S. electric utility distribution feeders. Actual feeder monitor-
ing began in June 1992 and was completed in September 1995. Twenty-
four different utilities participated in the data-collection effort with
almost 300 measurement sites. Monitoring for the project was designed
to provide a statistically valid set of data of the various phenomena
related to power quality.
Since the primary objective was to characterize power quality on pri-
mary distribution feeders, monitoring was done on the actual feeder
circuits. One monitor was located near the substation, and two addi-
tional sites were selected randomly (see Fig. 11.5). By randomly choos-
ing the remote sites, the overall project results represented power
quality on distribution feeders in general. It may not be realistic, how-
ever, to assume that the three selected sites completely characterized
power quality on the individual feeders involved.
When a monitoring project involves characterizing specific power
quality problems that are actually being experienced by customers on
the distribution system, the monitoring locations should be at actual
customer service entrance locations because it includes the effect of
step-down transformers supplying the customer. Data collected at the
service entrance can also characterize the customer load current vari-
ations and harmonic distortion levels. Monitoring at customer service
entrance locations has the additional advantage of reduced transducer
costs. In addition, it provides indications of the origin of the distur-
bances, i.e., the utility or the customer side of the meter.
Another important aspect of the monitoring location when charac-
terizing specific power quality problems is to locate the monitors as
close as possible to the equipment affected by power quality variations.
It is important that the monitor sees the same variations that the sen-
sitive equipment sees. High-frequency transients, in particular, can be
significantly different if there is significant separation between the
monitor and the affected equipment.
Power Quality Monitoring
461
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

A good compromise approach is to monitor at the substation and at
selected customer service entrance locations. The substation is impor-
tant because it is the PCC for most rms voltage variations. The voltage
sag experienced at the substation during a feeder fault is experienced
by all the customers on other feeders supplied from the same substation
bus. Customer equipment sensitivity and location on a feeder together
determine the service entrance locations for monitoring. For instance, it
is valuable to have a location immediately downline from each protec-
462
Chapter Eleven
R
R
R
R
R
PQN
PQN
PQN
CB
Monitoring
Locations
Tie Reclosers (N.O.)
Distribution Substation
3ph
3ph
3ph
3ph
phC
phB
300kVAr
FIXED
300kVAr
FIXED
3ph
300kVAr
FIXED
NC
phC
NC
phA
NC
R
Figure 11.5
Typical distribution feeder monitoring scheme.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

tive device on the feeder. Figure 11.6 illustrates the concept of a moni-
toring system based on monitoring at substations and customer sites. It
also illustrates how the Internet can be used to provide access to the
information for all interested parties (discussed in Sec. 11.1.4).
11.1.4
Options for permanent power quality
monitoring equipment
Permanent power quality monitoring systems, such as the system
illustrated in Fig. 11.6, should take advantage of the wide variety of
equipment that may have the capability to record power quality infor-
mation. Some of the categories of equipment that can be incorporated
into an overall monitoring system include the following:
1. Digital fault recorders (DFRs).
These may already be in place at
many substations. DFR manufacturers do not design the devices specifi-
cally for power quality monitoring. However, a DFR will typically trigger
on fault events and record the voltage and current waveforms that char-
acterize the event. This makes them valuable for characterizing rms dis-
Power Quality Monitoring
463
Distribution
Substation
Transmission
Substation
Monitoring
System
Data Collection
Data Collection
Local Network
Monitoring
Database
Database Management/
Local Data Analysis
Customer
Monitoring
System
Customer
Monitoring
System
Internet/
World Wide Web
Corporate
Intranet
Power Quality/
Reliability
Performance and
Data Analysis
Power Quality/
Energy
Information Service
Figure 11.6
Illustration of system power quality monitoring concept with monitoring at
the substation and selected customer locations.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

turbances, such as voltage sags, during power system faults. DFRs also
offer periodic waveform capture for calculating harmonic distortion levels.
2. Smart relays and other IEDs.
Many types of substation equip-
ment may have the capability to be an intelligent electronic device
(IED) with monitoring capability. Manufacturers of devices like relays
and reclosers that monitor the current anyway are adding on the capa-
bility to record disturbances and make the information available to an
overall monitoring system controller. These devices can be located on
the feeder circuits as well as at the substation.
3. Voltage recorders.
Power providers use a variety of voltage
recorders to monitor steady-state voltage variations on distribution
systems. We are encountering more and more sophisticated models
fully capable of characterizing momentary voltage sags and even har-
monic distortion levels. Typically, the voltage recorder provides a
trend that gives the maximum, minimum, and average voltage within
a specified sampling window (for example, 2 s). With this type of sam-
pling, the recorder can characterize a voltage sag magnitude ade-
quately. However, it will not provide the duration with a resolution
less than 2 s.
4. In-plant power monitors.
It is now common for monitoring sys-
tems in industrial facilities to have some power quality capabilities.
These monitors, particularly those located at the service entrance, can
be used as part of a utility monitoring program. Capabilities usually
include waveshape capture for evaluation of harmonic distortion lev-
els, voltage profiles for steady-state rms variations, and triggered
waveshape captures for voltage sag conditions. It is not common for
these instruments to have transient monitoring capabilities.
5. Special-purpose power quality monitors.
The monitoring instru-
ment developed for the EPRI DPQ project was specifically designed to
measure the full range of power quality variations. This instrument
features monitoring of voltage and current on all three phases plus the
neutral. A 14-bit analog-to-digital (A/D) board provides a sampling rate
of 256 points per cycle for voltage and 128 points per cycle for current.
This high sampling rate allowed detection of voltage harmonics as high
as the 100th and current harmonics as high as the 50th. Most power
quality instruments can record both triggered and sampled data.
Triggering should be based upon rms thresholds for rms variations and
on waveshape for transient variations. Simultaneous voltage and cur-
rent monitoring with triggering of all channels during a disturbance is
an important capability for these instruments. Power quality monitors
have proven suitable for substations, feeder locations, and customer
service entrance locations.
6. Revenue meters.
Revenue meters monitor the voltage and cur-
rent anyway, so it seems logical to offer alternatives for more advanced
464
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

monitoring that could include recording of power quality information.
Virtually all the revenue meter manufacturers are moving in this
direction, and the information from these meters can then be incorpo-
rated into an overall power quality monitoring system.
11.1.5
Disturbance monitor connections
The recommended practice is to provide input power to the monitor
from a circuit other than the circuit to be monitored. Some manufac-
turers include input filters and/or surge suppressors on their power
supplies that can alter disturbance data if the monitor is powered from
the same circuit that is being monitored.
The grounding of the power disturbance monitor is an important con-
sideration. The disturbance monitor will have a ground connection for
the signal to be monitored and a ground connection for the power sup-
ply of the instrument. Both of these grounds will be connected to the
instrument chassis. For safety reasons, both of these ground terminals
should be connected to earth ground. However, this has the potential of
creating ground loops if different circuits are involved.
Safety comes first. Therefore, both grounds should be connected
whenever there is a doubt about what to do. If ground loops can be a
significant problem such that transient currents might damage the
instruments or invalidate the measurements, it may be possible to
power the instrument from the same line that is being monitored
(check to make sure there is no signal conditioning in the power sup-
ply). Alternatively, it may be possible to connect just one ground (signal
to be monitored) and place the instrument on an insulating mat.
Appropriate safety practices such as using insulated gloves when oper-
ating the instrument must be employed if it is possible for the instru-
ment to rise in potential with respect to other apparatus and ground
references with which the operator can come into contact.
11.1.6
Setting monitor thresholds
Disturbance monitors are designed to detect conditions that are abnor-
mal. Therefore, it is necessary to define the range of conditions that can
be considered normal. Some disturbance monitors have preselected
(default) thresholds that can be used as a starting point.
The best approach for selecting thresholds is to match them with the
specifications of the equipment that is affected. This may not always be
possible due to a lack of specifications or application guidelines. An
alternative approach is to set the thresholds fairly tight for a period of
time (collect a lot of disturbance data) and then use the data collected
to select appropriate thresholds for longer-duration monitoring.
Power Quality Monitoring
465
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Some monitoring systems advertise the advantage of no setups and
no thresholds to set. Of course, there have to be thresholds because no
monitor (so far) has enough storage capacity to save every single cycle
of the voltages and currents being monitored. The thresholds in these
cases are essentially fixed in the instruments, and algorithms may be
adjusted internally based on the disturbances being recorded. This
type of system is convenient for the user since the setup is simple, but
it is still a compromise since you lose the capability to change the
thresholds based on the specific circumstances at a particular location.
11.1.7
Quantities and duration to measure
Sometimes, when characterizing system disturbances, it is sufficient to
monitor only the voltage signals. For instance, the voltages provide
information about the quality of power being delivered to a facility and
characterize the transients and voltage sags that may affect customer
equipment. However, there is a tremendous amount of information in
the currents associated with these disturbances that can help deter-
mine the cause and whether or not equipment was impacted. Also, cur-
rent measurements are required if harmonics are a concern since the
currents characterize the harmonic injection from the customer onto
the power system.
Current measurements are used to characterize the generation of
harmonics by nonlinear loads on the system. Current measurements at
individual loads are valuable for determining these harmonic genera-
tion characteristics. Current measurements on feeder circuits or at the
service entrance characterize a group of loads or the entire facility as a
source of harmonics. Current measurements on the distribution sys-
tem can be used to characterize groups of customers or an entire feeder.
Voltage measurements help characterize the system response to the
generated harmonic currents. Resonance conditions will be indicated by
high harmonic voltage distortion at specific frequencies. In order to deter-
mine system frequency response characteristics from measurements, volt-
ages and currents must be measured simultaneously. In order to measure
harmonic power flows, all three phases must be sampled simultaneously.
The duration of monitoring depends on the monitoring objectives. For
instance, if the objective is to solve problems that are caused by voltage
sags during remote faults on the utility system, monitoring may be
required for a significant length of time because system faults are prob-
ably rare. If the problem involves capacitor switching, it may be possible
to characterize the conditions over the period of a couple days. Harmonic
distortion problems and flicker problems should be characterized over a
period of at least 1 week to get a picture of how the load changes and how
system variations may affect these levels. The duration of monitoring is
becoming less of an issue as the general trend is to use permanent power
466
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

quality monitoring systems, taking advantage of the wide variety of
equipment that can provide information as part of the system.
11.1.8
Finding the source of a disturbance
The first step in identifying the source of a disturbance is to correlate
the disturbance waveform with possible causes, as outlined in Chap. 2.
Once a category for the cause has been determined (e.g., load switch-
ing, capacitor switching, remote fault condition, recloser operation),
the identification becomes more straightforward. The following general
guidelines can help:
■High-frequency voltage variations will be limited to locations close to
the source of the disturbance. Low-voltage (600 V and below) wiring
often damps out high-frequency components very quickly due to cir-
cuit resistance, so these frequency components will only appear when
the monitor is located close to the source of the disturbance.
■Power interruptions close to the monitoring location will cause a very
abrupt change in the voltage. Power interruptions remote from the
monitoring location will result in a decaying voltage due to stored
energy in rotating equipment and capacitors.
■The highest harmonic voltage distortion levels will occur close to
capacitors that are causing resonance problems. In these cases, a sin-
gle frequency will usually dominate the voltage harmonic spectrum.
11.2
Historical Perspective of Power Quality
Measuring Instruments
Early monitoring devices were bulky, heavy boxes that required a screw-
driver to make selections. Data collected were recorded on strip-chart
paper. One of the earliest power quality monitoring instruments is a
lightning strike recorder developed by General Electric in the 1920s2 (see
Fig. 11.7). The instrument makes an impulse-like mark on strip-chart
paper to record a lightning strike event along with its time and date of
occurrence. The data were more qualitative then quantitative, making
the data interpretation rather difficult. The principal component of the
device consisted of a windup clockwork motor that moved the strip of
paper from one spool to another, and a pair of electrodes that struck an
arc across the paper. 
Significant development on power quality devices was not made until
the 1960s when Martzloff developed a surge counter that could capture
a voltage waveform of lightning strikes.2 The device consisted of a high-
persistence analog oscilloscope with a logarithmic sweep rate (see Fig.
11.8). The improvement of this device over its predecessor was that the
Power Quality Monitoring
467
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

recorded data were quantitative (voltage waveforms) as opposed to
qualitative (marks on strip charts). By the mid-1960s, limitations of
power quality devices relating to the trigger mechanism and the preset
frequency response were well understood.
Many engineers consider that the first generation of power quality
monitors began in the mid-1970s when Dranetz Engineering
Laboratories (now Dranetz-BMI) introduced the Series 606 power line
468
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.7
Early power quality instrument developed by
GE in the 1920s to record lightning strikes. (Courtesy of
Alex McEachern, from his personal collection of historical
power instruments; www.Alex.McEachern.com.)
Figure 11.8
Martzloff’s 1967 surge counter. Recorded
data are quantitative. (Courtesy of Alex McEachern, from
his personal collection of historical power instruments;
www.Alex.McEachern.com.)
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

disturbance analyzer shown in Fig. 11.9.3,4 This was a microprocessor-
based monitor-analyzer first manufactured in 1975, and many units
are still in service. The output of these monitors was text-based,
printed on a paper tape. The printout described a disturbance by the
event type (sag, interruption, etc.) and voltage magnitude. These mon-
itors had limited functionalities compared to modern monitors, but the
triggering mechanics were already well developed.
Second-generation power quality instruments debuted in the mid-
1980s. This generation of power quality monitors generally featured
full graphic display and digital memory to view and store captured
power quality events, including both transients and steady-state
events. Some instruments had a capability of transmitting data from
a remote monitoring site to a central location for further analysis.
Second-generation power quality instruments virtually had perfected
the basic requirements of the triggering mechanism. Since the occur-
rence of a power quality disturbance is highly unpredictable, data
Power Quality Monitoring
469
Figure 11.9
A first-generation power line disturbance mon-
itor-analyzer, the Dranetz 606. (Courtesy of Dranetz-BMI.)
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

must be continuously recorded and processed without any dead time.
Complex triggering engines determine what data and how much data
should be saved to the digital memory. Trigger methods include fixed
and floating limits and sensitivities, waveshape changes, and specific
event characteristic parameters. These methods optimize the proba-
bility that what is important to the user will be captured and stored.
By the mid-1990s, the third-generation power quality instruments
emerged. The development of the third-generation power monitors was
inspired in part by the EPRI DPQ project. This generation of monitors
was more appropriate as part of a complete power quality monitoring
system, and the software systems to collect and manage the data were
also developed. Since the conclusion of the project, substantial field
experience gained revealed some of the difficulties in managing a large
system of power quality monitors5:
1. Managing the large volume of raw measurement data that must be
collected, analyzed, and archived becomes a serious challenge as the
number of monitoring points grows.
2. The data volume collected at each monitoring point can strain com-
munication mechanisms employed to move that data from monitor
to analysis point.
3. As understanding of system performance grows through the feed-
back provided by the monitoring data, detailed views of certain
events, such as normal capacitor switching, become less valuable
and would be of more use in a summary or condensed form.
4. The real value of any monitoring system lies in its ability to gener-
ate information rather than in collecting and storing volumes of
detailed raw data.
Based on the experience gained from the EPRI DPQ project, it was
realized that the information system aspect of a power monitoring pro-
gram plays a very important role in tracking power quality perfor-
mance. Thus, the development of the most recent generation of power
quality monitors was geared toward meeting the new information sys-
tem demand, i.e., to be able to discover knowledge or information from
the collected data as they are captured and to disseminate the infor-
mation rapidly. This type of instrument employs expert system and
advanced communication technologies.
11.3
Power Quality Measurement
Equipment
From Chap. 2, it is clear that power quality phenomena cover a wide
range of frequencies. They include everything from very fast transient
470
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

overvoltages (microsecond time frame) to long-duration outages (hours
or days time frame). Power quality problems also include steady-state
phenomena, such as harmonic distortion, and intermittent phenom-
ena, such as voltage flicker. Definitions for the different categories
were presented in Chap. 2. This wide variety of conditions that make
up power quality makes the development of standard measurement
procedures and equipment very difficult.
11.3.1
Types of instruments
Although instruments have been developed that measure a wide vari-
ety of disturbances, a number of different instruments may be used,
depending on the phenomena being investigated. Basic categories of
instruments that may be applicable include
■Wiring and grounding test devices
■Multimeters
■Oscilloscopes
■Disturbance analyzers
■Harmonic analyzers and spectrum analyzers
■Combination disturbance and harmonic analyzers
■Flicker meters
■Energy monitors
This section and Secs. 11.3.2 to 11.3.12 discuss the application and
limitations of these different instruments. Besides these instruments,
which measure steady-state signals or disturbances on the power sys-
tem directly, there are other instruments that can be used to help solve
power quality problems by measuring ambient conditions:
■Infrared meters can be very valuable in detecting loose connections
and overheating conductors. An annual procedure of checking the
system in this manner can help prevent power quality problems due
to arcing, bad connections, and overloaded conductors.
■Noise problems related to electromagnetic radiation may require
measurement of field strengths in the vicinity of affected equipment.
Magnetic gauss meters are used to measure magnetic field strengths
for inductive coupling concerns. Electric field meters can measure
the strength of electric fields for electrostatic coupling concerns.
■Static electricity meters are special-purpose devices used to measure
static electricity in the vicinity of sensitive equipment. Electrostatic
discharge (ESD) can be an important cause of power quality prob-
lems in some types of electronic equipment.
Power Quality Monitoring
471
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Regardless of the type of instrumentation needed for a particular
test, there are a number of important factors that should be considered
when selecting the instrument. Some of the more important factors
include
■Number of channels (voltage and/or current)
■Temperature specifications of the instrument
■Ruggedness of the instrument
■Input voltage range (e.g., 0 to 600 V)
■Power requirements
■Ability to measure three-phase voltages
■Input isolation (isolation between input channels and from each
input to ground)
■Ability to measure currents
■Housing of the instrument (portable, rack-mount, etc.)
■Ease of use (user interface, graphics capability, etc.)
■Documentation
■Communication capability (modem, network interface)
■Analysis software
The flexibility (comprehensiveness) of the instrument is also impor-
tant. The more functions that can be performed with a single instru-
ment, the fewer the number of instruments required. Recognizing that
there is some crossover between the different instrument categories,
we discuss the basic categories of instruments for direct measurement
of power signals in Secs. 11.3.2 to 11.3.12.
11.3.2
Wiring and grounding testers
Many power quality problems reported by end users are caused by
problems with wiring and/or grounding within the facility. These prob-
lems can be identified by visual inspection of wiring, connections, and
panel boxes and also with special test devices for detecting wiring and
grounding problems.
Important capabilities for a wiring and grounding test device include
■Detection of isolated ground shorts and neutral-ground bonds
■Ground impedance and neutral impedance measurement or indi-
cation
■Detection of open grounds, open neutrals, or open hot wires
■Detection of hot/neutral reversals or neutral/ground reversals
472
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Three-phase wiring testers should also test for phase rotation and
phase-to-phase voltages. These test devices can be quite simple and
provide an excellent initial test for circuit integrity. Many problems can
be detected without the requirement for detailed monitoring using
expensive instrumentation.
11.3.3
Multimeters
After initial tests of wiring integrity, it may also be necessary to make
quick checks of the voltage and/or current levels within a facility.
Overloading of circuits, undervoltage and overvoltage problems, and
unbalances between circuits can be detected in this manner. These
measurements just require a simple multimeter. Signals used to check
for these include
■Phase-to-ground voltages
■Phase-to-neutral voltages
■Neutral-to-ground voltages
■Phase-to-phase voltages (three-phase system)
■Phase currents
■Neutral currents
The most important factor to consider when selecting and using a
multimeter is the method of calculation used in the meter. All the com-
monly used meters are calibrated to give an rms indication for the mea-
sured signal. However, a number of different methods are used to
calculate the rms value. The three most common methods are
1. Peak method.
Assuming the signal to be a sinusoid, the meter
reads the peak of the signal and divides the result by 1.414 (square root
of 2) to obtain the rms.
2. Averaging method.
The meter determines the average value of a
rectified signal. For a clean sinusoidal signal (signal containing only one
frequency), this average value is related to the rms value by a constant.
3. True rms.
The rms value of a signal is a measure of the heating
that will result if the voltage is impressed across a resistive load. One
method of detecting the true rms value is to actually use a thermal
detector to measure a heating value. More modern digital meters use a
digital calculation of the rms value by squaring the signal on a sample-
by-sample basis, averaging over the period, and then taking the square
root of the result.
These different methods all give the same result for a clean, sinu-
soidal signal but can give significantly different answers for distorted
signals. This is very important because significant distortion levels are
Power Quality Monitoring
473
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

quite common, especially for the phase and neutral currents within the
facility. Table 11.1 can be used to better illustrate this point.
Each waveform in Table 11.1 has an rms value of 1.0 pu (100.0 per-
cent). The corresponding measured values for each type of meter are
displayed under the associated waveforms, normalized to the true rms
value.
11.3.4
Digital cameras
Photographs are extremely useful for documentation purposes. Those
conducting the measurements often get distracted trying to get instru-
ments to function properly and tests coordinated. They are rushed and
fail to write down certain key data that later turn out to be important.
Unfortunately, human memory is unreliable when there are dozens of
measurement details to remember. The modern digital camera has
become an indispendable tool when taking field measurements. It is a
simple matter to take photographs to document the tests. The photog-
rapher can immediately tell if the shot failed and retake it with a dif-
ferent exposure. Typical items to record photographically during field
measurements include
474
Chapter Eleven
TABLE 11.1
Comparison of Methods for Measuring Voltages and
Currents with Multimeters
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

1. Nameplates of transformers, motors, etc.
2. Instrumentation setups
3. Transducer and probe connections
4. Key waveform displays from instruments
5. Substations, switchgear arrangements, arrester positions, etc.
6. Dimensions of key electrical components such as cable lengths
Video cameras are similarly useful when there is moving action or ran-
dom events. For example, they may be used to help identify the loca-
tions of flashovers. Many industrial facilities will require special
permission to take photographs and may place stringent limitations on
the distribution of any photographs.
11.3.5
Oscilloscopes
An oscilloscope is valuable when performing real-time tests. Looking at
the voltage and current waveforms can provide much information
about what is happening, even without performing detailed harmonic
analysis on the waveforms. One can get the magnitudes of the voltages
and currents, look for obvious distortion, and detect any major varia-
tions in the signals.
There are numerous makes and models of oscilloscopes to choose
from. A digital oscilloscope with data storage is valuable because the
waveform can be saved and analyzed. Oscilloscopes in this category
often also have waveform analysis capability (energy calculation, spec-
trum analysis). In addition, the digital oscilloscopes can usually be
obtained with communications so that waveform data can be uploaded
to a personal computer for additional analysis with a software package.
The latest developments in oscilloscopes are hand-held instruments
with the capability to display waveforms as well as performing some
signal processing. These are quite useful for power quality investiga-
tions because they are very portable and can be operated like a volt-
ohm meter (VOM), but yield much more information. These are ideal
for initial plant surveys. A typical device is shown in Figs. 11.10 and
11.11. This particular instrument also has the capability to analyze
harmonics and permits connection with personal computers for further
data analysis and inclusion into reports as illustrated.
11.3.6
Disturbance analyzers
Disturbance analyzers and disturbance monitors form a category of
instruments that have been developed specifically for power quality
measurements. They typically can measure a wide variety of system
Power Quality Monitoring
475
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

disturbances from very short duration transient voltages to long-dura-
tion outages or undervoltages. Thresholds can be set and the instru-
ments left unattended to record disturbances over a period of time. The
information is most commonly recorded on a paper tape, but many
devices have attachments so that it can be recorded on disk as well.
There are basically two categories of these devices:
1. Conventional analyzers that summarize events with specific infor-
mation such as overvoltage and undervoltage magnitudes, sags and
surge magnitude and duration, transient magnitude and duration,
etc.
2. Graphics-based analyzers that save and print the actual waveform
along with the descriptive information which would be generated by
one of the conventional analyzers
It is often difficult to determine the characteristics of a disturbance
or a transient from the summary information available from conven-
tional disturbance analyzers. For instance, an oscillatory transient
cannot be effectively described by a peak and a duration. Therefore, it
476
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.10
A hand-held oscillographic monitoring instrument. (Courtesy of Fluke
Corporation.)
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

is almost imperative to have the waveform capture capability of a
graphics-based disturbance analyzer for detailed analysis of a power
quality problem (Fig. 11.12). However, a simple conventional distur-
bance monitor can be valuable for initial checks at a problem location.
11.3.7
Spectrum analyzers and harmonic
analyzers
Instruments in the disturbance analyzer category have very limited
harmonic analysis capabilities. Some of the more powerful analyzers
have add-on modules that can be used for computing fast Fourier
transform (FFT) calculations to determine the lower-order harmonics.
However, any significant harmonic measurement requirements will
demand an instrument that is designed for spectral analysis or har-
monic analysis. Important capabilities for useful harmonic measure-
ments include
Power Quality Monitoring
477
Figure 11.11
Demonstrating the use of a hand-held, three-
phase power quality monitoring instrument to quickly
evaluate voltages at the mains.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Capability to measure both voltage and current simultaneously so
that harmonic power flow information can be obtained.
■Capability to measure both magnitude and phase angle of individual
harmonic components (also needed for power flow calculations).
■Synchronization and a sampling rate fast enough to obtain accurate
measurement of harmonic components up to at least the 37th har-
monic (this requirement is a combination of a high sampling rate and
a sampling interval based on the 60-Hz fundamental).
■Capability to characterize the statistical nature of harmonic distor-
tion levels (harmonics levels change with changing load conditions
and changing system conditions).
There are basically three categories of instruments to consider for
harmonic analysis:
1. Simple meters.
It may sometimes be necessary to make a quick
check of harmonic levels at a problem location. A simple, portable
meter for this purpose is ideal. There are now several hand-held
instruments of this type on the market. Each instrument has advan-
tages and disadvantages in its operation and design. These devices
generally use microprocessor-based circuitry to perform the necessary
calculations to determine individual harmonics up to the 50th har-
monic, as well as the rms, the THD, and the telephone influence factor
(TIF). Some of these devices can calculate harmonic powers (magni-
tudes and angles) and can upload stored waveforms and calculated
data to a personal computer.
2. General-purpose spectrum analyzers.
Instruments in this cate-
gory are designed to perform spectrum analysis on waveforms for a
478
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.12
Graphics-based analyzer output.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

wide variety of applications. They are general signal analysis instru-
ments. The advantage of these instruments is that they have very pow-
erful capabilities for a reasonable price since they are designed for a
broader market than just power system applications. The disadvan-
tage is that they are not designed specifically for sampling power fre-
quency waveforms and, therefore, must be used carefully to assure
accurate harmonic analysis. There are a wide variety of instruments in
this category.
3. Special-purpose power system harmonic analyzers.
Besides the
general-purpose spectrum analyzers just described, there are also a
number of instruments and devices that have been designed specifi-
cally for power system harmonic analysis. These are based on the FFT
with sampling rates specifically designed for determining harmonic
components in power signals. They can generally be left in the field and
include communications capability for remote monitoring.
11.3.8
Combination disturbance and
harmonic analyzers
The most recent instruments combine harmonic sampling and energy
monitoring functions with complete disturbance monitoring functions
as well. The output is graphically based, and the data are remotely
gathered over phone lines into a central database. Statistical analysis
can then be performed on the data. The data are also available for input
and manipulation into other programs such as spreadsheets and other
graphical output processors.
One example of such an instrument is shown in Fig. 11.13. This
instrument is designed for both utility and end-user applications, being
mounted in a suitable enclosure for installation outdoors on utility
poles. It monitors three-phase voltages and currents (plus neutrals)
simultaneously, which is very important for diagnosing power quality
problems. The instrument captures the raw data and saves the data in
internal storage for remote downloading. Off-line analysis is performed
with powerful software that can produce a variety of outputs such as
that shown in Fig. 11.14. The top chart shows a typical result for a volt-
age sag. Both the rms variation for the first 0.8 s and the actual wave-
form for the first 175 ms are shown. The middle chart shows a typical
wave fault capture from a capacitor-switching operation. The bottom
chart demonstrates the capability to report harmonics of a distorted
waveform. Both the actual waveform and the harmonic spectrum can
be obtained.
Another device is shown in Fig. 11.15. This is a power quality moni-
toring system designed for key utility accounts. It monitors three-phase
voltages and has the capability to capture disturbances and page power
Power Quality Monitoring
479
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

quality engineers. The engineers can then call in and hear a voice mes-
sage describing the event. It has memory for more than 30 events.
Thus, while only a few short years ago power quality monitoring was
a rare feature to be found in instruments, it is becoming much more
commonplace in commercially available equipment.
11.3.9
Flicker meters*
Over the years, many different methods for measuring flicker have been
developed. These methods range from using very simple rms meters
with flicker curves to elaborate flicker meters that use exactly tuned fil-
ters and statistical analysis to evaluate the level of voltage flicker. This
section discusses various methods available for measuring flicker.
Flicker standards.
Although the United States does not currently have
a standard for flicker measurement, there are IEEE standards that
address flicker. IEEE Standards 141-19936 and 519-19927 both contain
480
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.13
A power quality monitoring instrument capable of monitoring disturbances,
harmonics, and other steady-state phenomena on both utility systems and end-user sys-
tems. (Courtesy of Dranetz-BMI.)
*This subsection was contributed by Jeff W. Smith and Erich W. Gunther.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Power Quality Monitoring
481
Phase C-A Voltage
RMS Variation
Trigger
Phase A Voltage
Wave Fault
Phase A Current
SS Wave
Trigger
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
–150
–1.5
–600
0
20
40
60
80
100
–400
–200
0
200
400
600
1.5
–0.5
0.5
0
–1
1
–100
–50
0
50
100
150
Voltage (%)
Voltage (%)
Voltage (pu)
Current (Amps)
Amps
0
0
0
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
25
50
75 100 125 150 175
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Time (s)
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
Harmonic
Duration
0.150 s
Min
81.38
Ave
96.77
Max
101.4
Max
1.094
Min
–1.280
Fund
267.5
RMS
281.0
CF
1.772
Min
–495.6
Max
498.0
THD
30.67
HRMS 86.19
TIF/IT 70249
BMI/Electrotek
Uncalibrated Data
Figure 11.14
Output from combination disturbance and har-
monic analyzer.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

flicker curves that have been used as guides for utilities to evaluate the
severity of flicker within their system. Both flicker curves, from
Standards 141 and 519, are shown in Fig. 11.16.
In other countries, a standard methodology for measuring flicker has
been established. The IEC flicker meter is the standard for measuring
flicker in Europe and other countries currently adopting IEC stan-
dards. The IEC method for flicker measurement, defined in IEC
Standard 61000-4-158 (formerly IEC 868), is a very comprehensive
approach to flicker measurement and is further described in “Flicker
Measurement Techniques” below. More recently, the IEEE has been
working toward adoption of the IEC flicker monitoring standards with
an additional curve to account for the differences between 230-V and
120-V systems.
Flicker measurement techniques
RMS strip charts. Historically, flicker has been measured using rms
meters, load duty cycle, and a flicker curve. If sudden rms voltage devi-
ations occurred with specified frequencies exceeding values found in
flicker curves, such as one shown in Fig. 11.16, the system was said to
have experienced flicker. A sample graph of rms voltage variations is
shown in Fig. 11.17 where large voltage deviations up to 9.0 V rms (V/V
 ± 8.0 percent on a 120-V base) are found. Upon comparing this to the
flicker curve in Fig. 11.16, the feeder would be experiencing flicker,
regardless of the duty cycle of the load producing the flicker, because 
482
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.15
A low-cost power quality monitor that can page power quality engi-
neers when disturbances occur.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

any sudden total change in voltage greater than 7.0 V rms results in
objectionable flicker, regardless of the frequency. The advantage to
such a method is that it is quite simple in nature and the rms data
required are rather easy to acquire. The apparent disadvantage to such
a method would be the lack of accuracy and inability to obtain the exact
frequency content of the flicker.
Fast Fourier transform. Another method that has been used to measure
flicker is to take raw samples of the actual voltage waveforms and
Power Quality Monitoring
483
IEEE 141
IEEE 519
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Changes/min
V/V (%)
0.1
1
10
Figure 11.16
Flicker curves from IEEE Standards 141 and 519.
Figure 11.17
RMS voltage variations.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

implement a fast Fourier transform on the demodulated signal (flicker
signal only) to extract the various frequencies and magnitudes found in
the data. These data would then be compared to a flicker curve. Although
similar to using the rms strip charts, this method more accurately quan-
tifies the data measured due to the magnitude and frequency of the
flicker being known. The downside to implementing this method is asso-
ciated with quantifying flicker levels when the flicker-producing load
contains multiple flicker signals. Some instruments compensate for this
by reporting only the dominant frequency and discarding the rest.
Flicker meters. Because of the complexity of quantifying flicker levels
that are based upon human perception, the most comprehensive
approach to measuring flicker is to use flicker meters. A flicker meter
is essentially a device that demodulates the flicker signal, weights it
according to established “flicker curves,” and performs statistical
analysis on the processed data.
Generally, these meters can be divided up into three sections. In the
first section the input waveform is demodulated, thus removing the
carrier signal. As a result of the demodulator, a dc offset and higher-fre-
quency terms (sidebands) are produced. The second section removes
these unwanted terms using filters, thus leaving only the modulating
(flicker) signal remaining. The second section also consists of filters
that weight the modulating signal according to the particular meter
specifications. The last section usually consists of a statistical analysis
of the measured flicker.
The most established method for doing this is described in IEC
Standard 61000-4-15.8 The IEC flicker meter consists of five blocks,
which are shown in Fig. 11.18.
Block 1 is an input voltage adapter that scales the input half-cycle
rms value to an internal reference level. This allows flicker measure-
ments to be made based upon a percent ratio rather than be dependent
upon the input carrier voltage level.
Block 2 is simply a squaring demodulator that squares the input to
separate the voltage fluctuation (modulating signal) from the main
voltage signal (carrier signal), thus simulating the behavior of the
incandescent lamp.
Block 3 consists of multiple filters that serve to filter out unwanted
frequencies produced from the demodulator and also to weight the
input signal according to the incandescent lamp eye-brain response.
The basic transfer function for the weighting filter is
H(s) 

1  s/2

(1  s/3) (1  s/4)
k1s

s2  2s  1
2
484
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

485
Input
transformer
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Block 5
Detector and
gain control
Demodulator
with
squaring
multiplier
Input voltage
adaptor
Signal generator
for calibration
checking
dB
–3
.05
35 Hz
1
0
8.8 Hz
V
V
Range
selector
Squaring
multiplier
64 level
classifier
Output
interfaces
1st-
order
sliding
mean
filter
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
20.0
Weighting filters
Squaring and
smoothing
A/D
converter
Sampling
rate
 50 Hz
Programming of short and long
observation periods
Statistical evaluation of flicker level
Output
and data
display
and
recording
Square rooter
√
RMS
meter
Output 1:
Half-cycle
rms voltage
indication
Output 2:
Weighted
voltage
fluctuation
Output 3:
Range
selection
Output 4:
Short time
integration
Output 5:
Recording
1-min integrator
ƒ
Figure 11.18
Diagram of the IEC flicker meter.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

(See IEC Standard 61000-4-15 for a description of the variables used
above.)
Block 4 consists of a squaring multiplier and sliding mean filter. The
voltage signal is squared to simulate the nonlinear eye-brain response,
while the sliding mean filter averages the signal to simulate the short-
term storage effect of the brain. The output of this block is considered
to be the instantaneous flicker level. A level of 1 on the output of this
block corresponds to perceptible flicker.
Block 5 consists of a statistical analysis of the instantaneous flicker
level. The output of block 4 is divided into suitable classes, thus creat-
ing a histogram. A probability density function is created based upon
each class, and from this a cumulative distribution function can be
formed.
Flicker level evaluation can be divided into two categories, short-
term and long-term. Short-term evaluation of flicker severity PST is
based upon an observation period of 10 min. This period is based upon
assessing disturbances with a short duty cycle or those that produce
continuous fluctuations. PST can be found using the equation
PST  0.031
4P0.1 
 0.052
5P1s 
 0.065
7P3s 
 0.28P
10s  0
.08P50
s
where the percentages P0.1, P1s, P3s, P10s, and P50s are the flicker levels
that are exceeded 0.1, 1.0, 3.0, 10.0, and 50.0 percent of the time,
respectively. These values are taken from the cumulative distribution
curve discussed previously. A PST of 1.0 on the output of block 5 repre-
sents the objectionable (or irritable) limit of flicker.
For cases where the duty cycle is long or variable, such as in arc fur-
naces, or disturbances on the system that are caused by multiple loads
operating simultaneously, the need for the long-term assessment of
flicker severity arises. Therefore, the long-term flicker severity PLT is
derived from PST using the equation
PLT 
3
where N is the number of PST readings and is determined by the duty
cycle of the flicker-producing load. The purpose is to capture one duty
cycle of the fluctuating load. If the duty cycle is unknown, the recom-
mended number of PST readings is 12 (2-h measurement window).
The advantage of using a single quantity, like Pst, to characterize
flicker is that it provides a basis for implementing contracts and
describing flicker levels in a much simpler manner. Figure 11.19 illus-
trates the Pst levels measured at the PCC with an arc furnace over a

N
i  1
P3
STi

N
486
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

24-h period. The melt cycles when the furnace was operating can be
clearly identified by the high Pst levels. Note that Pst levels greater
than 1.0 are usually considered to be levels that might result in cus-
tomers being aware of lights flickering.
11.3.10
Smart power quality monitors
All power quality measurement instruments previously described are
designed to collect power quality data. Some instruments can send the
data over a telecommunication line to a central processing location for
analysis and interpretation. However, one common feature among
these instruments is that they do not possess the capability to locally
analyze, interpret, and determine what is happening in the power sys-
tem. They simply record and transmit data for postprocessing.
Since the conclusion of the EPRI DPQ project in Fall 1995, it was
realized that these monitors, along with the monitoring practice previ-
ously described, were inadequate. An emerging trend in power quality
monitoring practice is to collect the data, turn them into useful infor-
mation, and disseminate it to users. All these processes take place
within the instrument itself. Thus, a new breed of power quality mon-
itor was developed with integrated intelligent systems to meet this new
challenge. This type of power quality monitor is an intelligent power
quality monitor where information is directly created within the
instrument and immediately available to the users. A smart power
Power Quality Monitoring
487
0.00
2:00
4:00
6:00
8:00
10:00 12:00 14:00 16:00 18:00 20:00 22:00
0:00
Time
Pst
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Figure 11.19
Flicker variations at the PCC with an arc furnace characterized by the Pst
levels for a 24-h period (March 1, 2001) (note that there is one Pst value every 10 min).
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

quality monitor allows engineers to take necessary or appropriate
actions in a timely manner. Thus, instead of acting in a reactive fash-
ion, engineers will act in a proactive fashion.
One such smart power quality monitor was developed by Electrotek
Concepts, Dranetz-BMI, EPRI, and the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA)
(Fig. 11.20). The system features on-the-spot data analysis with rapid
information dissemination via Internet technology, e-mails, pagers, and
faxes. The system consists of data acquisition, data aggregation, commu-
nication, Web-based visualization, and enterprise management compo-
nents. The data acquisition component (DataNode) is designed to
measure the actual power system voltages, currents, and other quanti-
ties. The data aggregation, communication, Web-based visualization, and
enterprise management components are performed by a mission-specific
computer system called the InfoNode. The communication between the
data acquisition device and the InfoNode is accomplished through serial
RS-232/485/422 or Ethernet communications using industry standard
protocols (UCAMMS and Modbus). One or more data acquisition devices,
or DataNodes, can be connected to an InfoNode.
The InfoNode has its own firmware that governs the overall func-
tionality of the monitoring system. It acts as a special-purpose data-
base manager and Web server. Various special-purpose intelligent
systems are implemented within this computer system. Since it is a
Web server, any user with Internet connectivity can access the data
and its analysis results stored in its memory system. The monitoring
system supports the standard file transfer protocol (FTP). Therefore, a
database can be manually archived via FTP by simply copying the data-
base to any personal computer with connectivity to the mission-specific
computer system via network or modem. Proprietary software can be
used to archive data from a group of InfoNodes.
11.3.11
Transducer requirements
Monitoring of power quality on power systems often requires trans-
ducers to obtain acceptable voltage and current signal levels. Voltage
monitoring on secondary systems can usually be performed with direct
connections, but even these locations require current transformers
(CTs) for the current signal.
Many power quality monitoring instruments are designed for input
voltages up to 600 V rms and current inputs up to 5 A rms. Voltage and
current transducers must be selected to provide these signal levels.
Two important concerns must be addressed in selecting transducers:
1. Signal levels.
Signal levels should use the full scale of the instru-
ment without distorting or clipping the desired signal.
488
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

2. Frequency response.
This is particularly important for transient
and harmonic distortion monitoring, where high-frequency signals
are particularly important.
These concerns and transducer installation considerations will now be
discussed.
Signal levels.
Careful consideration to sizing of voltage transducers
(VTs) and CTs is required to take advantage of the full resolution of the
instrument without clipping the measured signal. Improper sizing can
result in damage to the transducer or monitoring instrument.
Digital monitoring instruments incorporate the use of analog-to-dig-
ital (A/D) converters. These A/D boards convert the analog signal
received by the instrument from the transducers into a digital signal
for processing. To obtain the most accurate representation of the signal
being monitored, it is important to use as much of the full range of the
A/D board as possible. The noise level of a typical A/D board is approx-
imately 33 percent of the full-scale bit value (5 bits for a 16-bit A/D
board). Therefore, as a general rule, the signal that is input to the
instrument should never be less than one-eighth of the full-scale value
so that it is well above the noise level of the A/D board. This can be
accomplished by selecting the proper transducers.
Voltage transducers. VTs should be sized to prevent measured distur-
bances from inducing saturation in the VT. For transients, this gener-
ally requires that the knee point of the transducer saturation curve be
at least 200 percent of nominal system voltage.
Power Quality Monitoring
489
Signature System Architecture
Web Browsers
InfoNodes
DataNodes
Figure 11.20
A smart power quality monitoring system—it
turns data into information on the spot and makes it avail-
able over the Internet. (Courtesy of Dranetz-BMI.)
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Example 1. When monitoring on a 12.47-kV distribution feeder and
measuring line-to-ground, the nominal voltage across the primary of
the voltage transducer will be 7200 V rms.
A VT ratio of 60:1 will produce an output voltage on the VT of 120 V
rms (170 V peak) for a 7200-V rms input. Therefore, if the full-range
value of the instrument is 600 V rms and the instrument incorporates
a 16-bit A/D board, 13 bits of the A/D board will be used.
It is always good practice to incorporate some allowance in the cal-
culations for overvoltage conditions. The steady-state voltage should
not be right at the full-scale value of the monitoring instrument. If an
overvoltage occurred, the signal would be clipped by the A/D board, and
the measurement would be useless. Allowing for a 200 percent over-
voltage is suggested. This can be accomplished by changing the input
scale on the instrument, or sizing the VT accordingly.
Current transducers.
Selecting the proper transducer for currents is
more difficult. The current in any system changes more often and with
greater magnitude than the voltage. Most power quality instrument
manufacturers supply CTs with their equipment. These CTs come in a
wide range of sizes to accommodate different load levels. The CTs are
usually rated for maximum continuous load current.
The proper CT current rating and turns ratio depend on the mea-
surement objective. If fault or inrush currents are of concern, the CT
must be sized in the range of 20 to 30 times normal load current. This
will result in low resolution of the load currents and an inability to
accurately characterize load current harmonics.
If harmonics and load characterization are important, CTs should be
selected to accurately characterize load currents. This permits evalua-
tion of load response to system voltage variations and accurate calcu-
lation of load current harmonics.
Example 2. The desired current signal to the monitoring instrument
is 1 to 2 A rms. Assuming a 1-A value, the optimum CT ratio for an
average feeder current of 120 A rms is 120:1. Manufacturer’s data com-
monly list a secondary current base of 5 A to describe CT turns ratios
rather than 1 A. The primary rating for a CT with a 5-A secondary rat-
ing is calculated as follows:
CTPRI 

 600
Thus, a 600:5 CT would be specified.
120  5

1
IPRICTSEC

ISEC
490
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Frequency response.
Transducer frequency response characteristics
can be illustrated by plotting the ratio correction factor (RCF), which is
the ratio of the expected output signal (input scaled by turns ratio) to
the actual output signal, as a function of frequency.
Voltage transducers. The frequency response of a standard metering
class VT depends on the type and burden. In general, the burden
should be a very high impedance (see Figs. 11.21 and 11.22). This is
generally not a problem with most monitoring equipment available
today. Power quality monitoring instruments, digital multimeters
(DMMs), oscilloscopes, and other instruments all present a very high
impedance to the transducer. With a high impedance burden, the
response is usually adequate to at least 5 kHz. A typical RCF is plotted
in Figs. 11.21 and 11.22 for two VT burdens.9
Some substations use capacitively coupled voltage transformers
(CCVTs) for voltage transducers. These should not be used for general
power quality monitoring. There is a low-voltage transformer in paral-
lel with the lower capacitor in the capacitive divider. This configuration
results in a circuit that is tuned to 60 Hz and will not provide accurate
representation of any higher-frequency components.
Measuring very high frequency components in the voltage requires a
capacitive divider or pure resistive divider. Figure 11.23 illustrates the
difference between a CCVT and a capacitive divider. Special-purpose
capacitor dividers can be obtained for measurements requiring accu-
rate characterization of transients up to at least 1 MHz.
Current transducers. Standard metering class CTs are generally adequate
for frequencies up to 2 kHz (phase error may start to become significant
before this).10 For higher frequencies, window-type CTs with a high turns
ratio (doughnut, split-core, bar-type, and clamp-on) should be used.
Additional desirable attributes for CTs include
1. Large turns ratio, e.g., 2000:5 or greater.
2. Window-type CTs are preferred. Primary wound CTs (i.e., CTs in
which system current flows through a winding) may be used, pro-
vided that the number of turns is less than five.
3. Small remnant flux, e.g., ±10 percent of the core saturation value.
4. Large core area. The more steel used in the core, the better the fre-
quency response of the CT.
5. Secondary winding resistance and leakage impedance as small as
possible. As shown in Fig. 11.24, this allows more of the output sig-
nal to flow into the burden, rather than the stray capacitance and
core exciting impedance.
Power Quality Monitoring
491
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Installation considerations.
Monitoring on the distribution primary
requires both voltage and current transducers. Selection of the best
combination of these transducers depends on a number of factors:
■Monitoring location (substation, overhead, underground, etc.)
■Space limitations
■Ability to interrupt circuit for transducer installation
■Need for current monitoring
Substation transducers. Usually, existing substation CTs and VTs
(except CCVTs) can be used for power quality monitoring.
Utility overhead line locations. For power quality monitoring on distribu-
tion primary circuits, it is often desirable to use a transducer that could
be installed without taking the circuit out of service. Recently, trans-
ducers for monitoring both voltage and current have been developed
that can be installed on a live line.
These devices incorporate a resistive divider-type VT and window-
type CT in a single unit. A split-core choke is clamped around the phase
492
Chapter Eleven
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
RCF
10
100
1000
10000
100000
1000000
Frequency in Hertz
Figure 11.21
Frequency response of a standard VT with 1-M	 burden.
10
100
1000
10000
100000
1000000
Frequency in Hertz
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
RCF
Figure 11.22
Frequency response of a standard VT with 100-	 burden.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

conductor and is used to shunt the line current through the CT in the
insulator. This method allows the device to be installed on the crossarm
in place of the original insulator. By using the split-core choke, the
phase conductor does not have to be broken, and thus, the transducers
can be installed on a live line.
Initial tests indicated adequate frequency response for these trans-
ducers. However, field experience with these units has shown that the
frequency response, even at 60 Hz, is dependent on current magnitude,
temperature, and secondary cable length. This makes this type of
device difficult to use for accurate power quality monitoring. Care must
be exercised in matching these transducers to the instruments.
In general, all primary sites should be monitored with metering class
VTs and CTs to obtain accurate results over the required frequency spec-
trum. Installation will require a circuit outage, but convenient designs
can be developed for pole-top installations to minimize the outage.
Another option for monitoring primary sites involves monitoring at
the secondary of an unloaded distribution transformer. This will give
accurate results up to at least 3 kHz. This option does not help with the
current transducers, but it is possible to get by without the currents at
some circuit locations (e.g., end of the feeder). This option may be par-
ticularly attractive for underground circuits where the monitor can be
installed on the secondary of a pad-mounted transformer.
Power Quality Monitoring
493
Vout
Vout
Vin
Vin
Good
Bad
Figure 11.23
Capacitively coupled
voltage dividers.
10
100
1000
10000
100000
1000000
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
Equivalent circuit for determining CT frequency response
ideal
transformer
primary
winding
secondary
winding
Zp
Ze
Zs
Zb
Cs
N:5
exciting
impedance
stray
capacitance
burden
Frequency in Hertz
1/RCF
Figure 11.24
Frequency response of a window-type CT.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Primary wound CTs are available from a variety of CT manufac-
turers. Reference 2 concludes that any primary wound CT with a sin-
gle turn, or very few turns, should have a frequency response up to 
10 kHz.
End-user (secondary) sites. Transducer requirements at secondary sites
are much simpler. Direct connection for the voltage is possible for
120/208- or 277/480-V rms systems. This permits full utilization of the
instrument’s frequency-response capability.
Currents can be monitored with either metering CTs (at the service
entrance, for example) or with clamp-on CTs (at locations within the
facility). Clamp-on CTs are available in a wide range of turns ratios.
The frequency range is usually published by the manufacturer.
Summary of transducer recommendations.
Table 11.2 describes differ-
ent monitoring locations and the different types of transducers that are
adequate for monitoring at these locations.
Table 11.3 describes the different power quality phenomena and the
proper transducers to measure that type of power quality problem.
Tables 11.2 and 11.3 should be used in conjunction with each other to
determine the best transducer for a given application.
Summary of monitoring equipment capabilities.
Figure 11.25 summa-
rizes the capabilities of the previously described metering instruments
as they relate to the various categories of power quality variations.
11.4
Assessment of Power Quality
Measurement Data
As utilities and industrial customers have expanded their power
quality monitoring systems, the data management, analysis, and
interpretation functions have become the most significant challenges
in the overall power quality monitoring effort. In addition, the shift
in the use of power quality monitoring from off-line benchmarking to
on-line operation with automatic identification of problems and con-
cerns has made the task of data management and analysis even more
critical.
There are two streams of power quality data analysis, i.e., off-line
and on-line analyses. The off-line power quality data analysis, as the
term suggests, is performed off-line at the central processing locations.
On the other hand, the on-line data analysis is performed within the
instrument itself for immediate information dissemination. Both types
of power quality data assessment are described in Secs. 11.4.1 and
11.4.2.
494
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Power Quality Monitoring
495
TABLE 11.2
VT and CT Options for Different Locations
Location
VT
CT
Substation
Metering VTs
Metering CTs
Special-purpose
Relaying CTs
capacitive or resistive 
dividers
Calibrated bushing taps
Overhead lines
Metering VTs
Metering CTs
Underground 
Metering VTs
Metering CTs
locations
Pad-mounted transformer
Special-purpose dividers
Secondary sites’
Direct connection
Metering CTs
service entrance
Clamp-on CTs
In facility
Direct connection
Clamp-on CTs
TABLE 11.3
VT and CT Requirements for Different Power Quality Variations
Concern
VTs* 
CTs
Voltage variations
Standard metering
Standard metering
Harmonic levels
Standard metering
Window-type
Low-frequency transients 
Standard metering with 
Window-type
(switching)
high-kneepoint saturation
High-frequency transients 
Capacitive or resistive 
Window-type
(lightning)
dividers
*VTs are usually not required at locations below 600 V rms nominal.
Figure 11.25
Power quality measurement equipment capabilities.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

11.4.1
Off-line power quality data
assessment
Off-line power quality data assessment is carried out separately from
the monitoring instruments. Dedicated computer software is used for
this purpose. Large-scale monitoring projects with large volumes of
data to analyze often present a challenging set of requirements for
software designers and application engineers. First, the software
must integrate well with monitoring equipment and the large num-
ber of productivity tools that are currently available. The storage of
vast quantities of both disturbance and steady-state measurement
data requires an efficient and well-suited database. Data manage-
ment tools that can quickly characterize and load power quality data
must be devised, and analysis tools must be integrated with the data-
base. Automation of data management and report generation tasks
must be supported, and the design must allow for future expansion
and customizing.
The new standard format for interchanging power quality data—the
Power Quality Data Interchange Format (PQDIF)—makes sharing of
data between different types of monitoring systems much more feasi-
ble. This means that applications for data management and data
analysis can be written by third parties and measurement data from a
wide variety of monitoring systems can be accessible to these systems.
PQView (www.pqview.com) is an example of this type of third-party
application. The PQDIF standard is described in Sec. 11.6.
The off-line power quality data assessment software usually per-
forms the following functions:
■Viewing of individual disturbance events.
■RMS variation analysis which includes tabulations of voltage sags
and swells, magnitude-duration scatter plots based on CBEMA, ITI,
or user-specified magnitude-duration curves, and computations of a
wide range of rms indices such as SARFI, SIARFI, and CAIDI.
■Steady-state analysis which includes trends of rms voltages, rms cur-
rents, and negative- and zero-sequence unbalances. In addition,
many software systems provide statistical analysis of various mini-
mum, average, maximum, standard deviation, count, and cumula-
tive probability levels. Statistics can be temporally aggregated and
dynamically filtered. Figures 11.26 and 11.27 show the time trend of
phase A rms voltage along with its histogram representation.
■Harmonic analysis where users can perform voltage and current har-
monic spectra, statistical analysis of various harmonic indices, and
trending overtime.
496
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Transient analysis which includes statistical analysis of maximum
voltage, transient durations, and transient frequency.
■Standardized power quality reports (e.g. daily reports, monthly
reports, statistical performance reports, executive summaries, cus-
tomer power quality summaries).
Power Quality Monitoring
497
Samples: 1404
Minimum: 6873.0806
Average:
7284.7099
Maximum: 7600.3726
6800
6900
7000
7100
7200
7300
7400
7500
7600
7700
4/26/95
5/1/95
5/6/95
5/11/95
5/16/95
5/21/95
5/26/95
5/31/95
6/5/95
V RMS A
Figure 11.26
Time trend of an rms voltage is a standard feature in many power quality
analysis software programs.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Count
6870
6910
6950
6990
7030
7070
7110
7150
7190
7230
7270
7310
7350
7390
7470
7510
7550
7590
7430
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Cumulative Frequency
Samples:
1404
Minimum: 6873.0806
Average:
7284.7099
Maximum: 7600.3726
V RMS A
Figure 11.27
Histogram representation of rms voltage indicates the statistical distribu-
tion of the rms voltage magnitude.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Analysis of protective device operation (identify problems).
■Analysis of energy use.
■Correlation of power quality levels or energy use with important
parameters (e.g., voltage sag performance versus lightning flash
density).
■Equipment performance as a function of power quality levels (equip-
ment sensitivity reports).
11.4.2
On-line power quality data
assessment
On-line power quality data assessment analyzes data as they are cap-
tured. The analysis results are available immediately for rapid dis-
semination. Complexity in the software design requirement for on-line
assessment is usually higher than that of off-line. Most features avail-
able in off-line analysis software can also be made available in an on-
line system. One of the primary advantages of on-line data analysis is
that it can provide instant message delivery to notify users of specific
events of interest. Users can then take immediate actions upon receiv-
ing the notifications. Figure 11.28 illustrates a simple message deliv-
ered to a user reporting that a capacitor bank located upstream from a
data acquisition node called “DataNode H09_5530” was energized at
05-15-2002 at 04:56:11 A.M. The message also details the transient
characteristics such as the magnitude, frequency, and duration along
with the relative location of the capacitor bank from the data acquisi-
tion node.
Figure 11.29 shows another example of the on-line power quality
assessment. It shows the time trend of a fifth-harmonic current mag-
nitude along with its statistical distribution. The data and its analysis
are displayed on a standard Web browser. Here a user can analyze data
up to the current time. This on-line system has the capability of per-
forming a full range of transient, harmonic, and steady-state charac-
terization along with their statistical distribution analysis comparable
to that in off-line assessment analysis.
11.5
Application of Intelligent Systems
Many advanced power quality monitoring systems are equipped with
either off-line or on-line intelligent systems to evaluate disturbances
and system conditions so as to make conclusions about the cause of the
problem or even predict problems before they occur. The applications of
intelligent systems or autonomous expert systems in monitoring
instruments help engineers determine the system condition rapidly.
498
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

This is especially important when restoring service following major dis-
turbances.
The implementation of intelligent systems within a monitoring
instrument can significantly increase the value of a monitoring appli-
cation since it can generate information rather than just collect data.11
The intelligent systems are packaged as individual autonomous expert
system modules, where each module performs specific functions.
Examples include an expert system module that analyzes capacitor-
switching transients and determines the relative location of the capac-
itor bank, and an expert system module to determine the relative
location of the fault causing a voltage sag. Sections 11.5.1 and 11.5.2
describe the approach in designing an autonomous expert system for
power quality data assessment, and give application examples.
11.5.1
Basic design of an expert system for
monitoring applications
The development of an autonomous expert system calls for many
approaches such as signal processing and rule-based techniques along
with the knowledge-discovery approach commonly known as data min-
ing. Before the expert system module is designed, the functionalities or
objectives of the module must be clearly defined. In other words, the
designers or developers of the expert system module must have a clear
understanding about what knowledge they are trying to discover from
volumes of raw measurement data. This is very important since they will
ultimately determine the overall design of the expert system module.
Power Quality Monitoring
499
Figure 11.28
On-line data analysis can send e-mail notifications to users about the occur-
rence of specific events.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The process of turning raw measurement data into knowledge
involves data selection and preparation, information extraction from
selected data, information assimilation, and report presentation. These
steps (illustrated in Fig. 11.30) are commonly known as knowledge dis-
covery or data mining.12
The first step in the knowledge discovery is to select appropriate
measurement quantities and disregard other types of measurements
that do not provide relevant information. In addition, during the data-
selection process preliminary analyses are usually carried out to
ensure the quality of the measurement. For example, an expert system
module is developed to retrieve a specific answer, and it requires mea-
surements of instantaneous three-phase voltage and current wave-
forms to be available. The data-selection task is responsible for
ensuring that all required phase voltage and current waveform data
are available before proceeding to the next step. In some instances, it
might be necessary to interpolate or extrapolate data in this step.
Other preliminary examinations include checking any outlier magni-
tudes, missing data sequences, corrupted data, etc. Examination on
data quality is important as the accuracy of the knowledge discovered
is determined by the quality of data.
500
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.29
On-line data analysis displayed on a standard Web browser. The analysis
includes the trend of minimum, maximum, and average values of the fifth-harmonic volt-
age distortion along with a statistical distribution of the average values.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The second step attempts to represent the data and project them
onto domains in which a solution is more favorable to discover.
Signal-processing techniques and power system analysis are applied.
An example of this step is to transform data into another domain
where the information might be located. The Fourier transform is
performed to uncover frequency information for steady-state signals,
the wavelet transform is performed to find the temporal and fre-
quency information for transient signals, and other transforms may
be performed as well.
Now that the data are already projected onto other spaces or domains,
we are ready to extract the desired information. Techniques to extract
the information vary from sophisticated ones, such as pattern recogni-
tion, neural networks, and machine learning, to simple ones, such as
finding the maximum value in the transformed signal or counting the
number of points in which the magnitude of a voltage waveform is above
a predetermined threshold value. One example is looking for harmonic
frequencies of a distorted waveform. In the second step the waveform is
transformed using the Fourier transform, resulting in a frequency-
domain signal. A simple harmonic frequency extraction process might
be accomplished by first computing the noise level in the frequency-
domain signal, and subsequently setting a threshold number to several-
fold that of the noise level. Any magnitude higher than the threshold
number may indicate the presence of harmonic frequencies.
Power Quality Monitoring
501
Transformed
Data
Raw
Data
Selected
Data
Extracted
Information
Assimilated
Information
Knowledge definition:
• The goals of the end user
• Answer to a specific question
Knowledge
Data selection:
• Remove outliers
• Select relevant data
Data transformation:
• Rearrange data favorable
for extraction
• Frequency domain,
time-scale domain
Data mining:
• Extract features or patterns
• Expert systems
• Neural networks
• Machine learning
• Pattern recognition
• etc.
Information assimilation:
• Incorporate pieces of
information/knowledge
• Resolve conflicting information
Interpretation and
report presentation:
• Interpret assimilated
information into knowledge
• Report presentation
Figure 11.30
Process of turning raw data into answers or knowledge.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The data mining step usually results in scattered pieces of informa-
tion. These pieces of information are assimilated to form knowledge. In
some instances assimilation of information is not readily possible since
some pieces of information conflict with each other. If the conflicting
information cannot be resolved, the quality of the answer provided
might have limited use. The last step in the chain is interpretation of
knowledge and report presentation.
11.5.2
Example applications of expert
systems
One or more autonomous expert system modules can be implemented
within an advanced power quality monitoring system. When a power
quality event is captured, all modules will be invoked. Each module
will attempt to discover the unique knowledge it is designed to look for.
Once the unique knowledge is discovered, the knowledge will be avail-
able for users to inspect. The knowledge can be viewed on a standard
browser, or sent as an e-mail, pager, or fax message. We present a few
examples of autonomous expert systems.
Voltage sag direction module.
Voltage sags are some of the most impor-
tant disturbances on utility systems. They are usually caused by a
remote fault somewhere on the power system; however, they can also
be caused by a fault inside end-user facilities. Determining the location
of the fault causing the voltage sag can be an important step toward
preventing voltage sags in the future and assigning responsibility for
addressing the problem. For instance, understanding the fault location
is necessary for implementing contracts that include voltage sag per-
formance specifications. The supplier would not be responsible for sags
that are caused by faults within the customer facility. This is also
important when trying to assess performance of the distribution sys-
tem in comparison to the transmission system as the cause of voltage
sag events that can impact customer operations. The fault locations
can help identify future problems or locations where maintenance or
system changes are required. An expert system to identify the fault
location (at least upstream or downstream from the monitoring loca-
tion) can help in all these cases.
An autonomous expert system module called the voltage sag direc-
tion module is designed just for that purpose, i.e., to detect and identify
a voltage sag event and subsequently determine the origin (upstream
or downstream from the monitoring location) of the voltage sag event.
If a data acquisition node is installed at a customer PCC, the source of
the voltage sag will be either on the utility or the customer side of the
meter. If the monitoring point is at a distribution substation trans-
502
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

former, the source of the voltage sag will be either the distribution sys-
tem or the transmission system.
The voltage sag direction module works by comparing current and
voltage rms magnitudes both before and after the sag event. It tracks
phase angle changes from prefault to postfault. By assembling infor-
mation from the rms magnitude comparison and the phase angle
behavior, the origin of the voltage sag event can be accurately deter-
mined. In addition, the voltage sag direction module is equipped with
algorithms to assess the quality of the knowledge or answer discovered.
If the answer is deemed accurate, it will be sent as an output; other-
wise, it will be neglected and no answer will be provided. In this way,
inaccurate or false knowledge can be minimized. Inaccurate knowledge
can be due to a number of factors, primarily to missing data and unre-
solved conflicting characteristics.
Outputs of the voltage sag direction module can be displayed on a
computer screen using Web browser software, displayed in printed
paper format, sent to a pager, or sent as an e-mail. Figure 11.31 shows
an output of a voltage sag direction expert system module. The first col-
umn indicates the event time, the second column indicates the monitor
identification, the third column indicates event types, the fourth col-
umn indicates the triggered channel, and finally the fifth column indi-
cates the characteristics of the event and outputs of the answer
module.
Power Quality Monitoring
503
Figure 11.31
A standard Web browser is the interface between the monitoring system
and users. Outputs of the voltage sag direction module are shown in the last column of
the table.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Figure 11.31 shows an event table with several voltage sag events
that occurred at 11:16:55 A.M. on April 24, 2002. A tree branch that fell
across a 13-kV overhead line caused the sag events. A total of five auto-
matic reclosure operations were performed before the breaker finally
tripped and locked out. There were two data acquisition nodes avail-
able to capture this disturbance: one at the substation, i.e., at the sec-
ondary of 161/13-kV transformer (LCUBSub), where the affected
overhead line was served, and one at the service entrance of a
Electrotek office complex (H09_5530) located about 0.5 mi from the
substation. (See Fig. 11.38 for the geographical locations of these data
acquisition nodes.) Obviously, the LCUBSub and H09_5530 data acqui-
sition nodes should report that the directions or the relative origin of
voltage sags are downstream and upstream, respectively. Analysis pro-
vided by the voltage sag direction module reports the direction of the
voltage sag correctly. Note that there are two voltage sag events where
504
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.32
An event summary report detailing time of occurrence and event character-
istics. There are five voltage sag events associated with the autoreclosure operation fol-
lowing a fault. The voltage sag direction module identifies the origin of the sag correctly.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the module does not provide any knowledge about the origin of the sag
event. This happens since the algorithms were unable to resolve con-
flicting characteristics extracted from the data. Figure 11.32 shows the
table of the sag events associated with this fault.
Radial fault locator module.
Radial distribution feeders are susceptible
to various short-circuit events such as symmetrical faults (three-phase)
and unsymmetrical faults, including single-line-to-ground, double-
line-to-ground, and line-to-line faults. These system faults arise from
various conditions ranging from natural causes such as severe weather
conditions and animal contacts to human intervention and errors,
including equipment failure. Quickly identifying the source and loca-
tion of faults is the key to cost-efficient system restoration. The current
practice to locate the faults is to send a lineperson to patrol the sus-
pected feeders. While this is a proven method, it is certainly not a cost-
effective way to restore power.
An expert system module called the radial fault locator is developed
to estimate the distance to a fault location from the location where the
measurements were made. The unique feature of this module is that it
only requires a set of three-phase voltages and currents from a single
measurement location with the sequence impedance data of the pri-
mary distribution feeder. The module works by first identifying a per-
manent fault event based on the ground fault and phase fault pickup
current threshold. Users can enter these values in the answer module
setup window shown in Fig. 11.33. Once a permanent fault event is
identified, the distance to fault estimation is carried out based on the
apparent impedance approach.13 Estimates of the distance to the fault
are then displayed in a computer screen with the Web browser illus-
trated in Fig. 11.34 or sent to a lineperson via a pager. The lineperson
can quickly pinpoint the fault location. This example illustrates the
emerging trend in smart power quality monitoring, i.e., collect power
quality data and extract and formulate information for users to per-
form necessary actions.
Capacitor-switching direction module.
Capacitor-switching operations
are the most common cause of transient events on the power system.
When a capacitor bank is energized, it interacts with the system induc-
tance, yielding oscillatory transients. The transient overvoltage in an
uncontrolled switching is between 1.0 to 2.0 pu with typical overvolt-
ages of 1.3 to 1.4 pu and frequencies of 250 to 1000 Hz. Transients due
to energizing utility capacitor banks can propagate into customer facil-
ities. Common problems associated with the switching transients
include tripping off sensitive equipment such adjustable-speed drives
and other electronically controlled loads. Some larger end-user facilities
Power Quality Monitoring
505
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

may also have capacitor banks to provide reactive power and voltage
support as well.
When a sensitive load trips off due to capacitor-switching transients,
it is important to know where the capacitor bank is, whether it is on the
utility side or in the customer facility. A capacitor-switching direction
expert system module is designed to detect and identify a capacitor-
switching event and determine the relative location of the capacitor
bank from the point where measurements were collected. It only
requires a set of three-phase voltages and currents to perform the tasks
mentioned. This module is useful to determine the responsible parties,
i.e., the utility or customer, and help engineers pinpoint the problem-
atic capacitor bank.
The capacitor-switching transient direction module works as follows.
When an event is captured, the module will extract the information
and represent it in domains where detection and identification are
more favorable. The domains where the information is represented are
in the time-, frequency-, and time-scale (wavelet) domains. If the root
cause of the event is due to a capacitor bank energization, the answer
506
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.33
Setup window for the radial fault location answer module.
Figure 11.34
The distance estimates presented in tabular form.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

module will proceed to determine the most probable location of the
capacitor bank.
There are only two possible locations with respect to the monitoring
location, i.e., upstream or downstream. The expert system module
works well with grounded, ungrounded, delta-configured, and wye- (or
star-) configured capacitor banks. It also works well for back-to-back
capacitor banks. The capacitor-switching transient direction module is
equipped with algorithms to determine the quality of the information
it discovers. Thus, the module may provide an undetermined answer.
This answer is certainly better than an incorrect one.
An example application of the answer module to analyze data capture
from a data acquisition node installed at an office complex service
entrance is shown in Fig. 11.35. The analysis results are shown in Fig.
11.36, which is a screen capture from a standard Web browser. Since the
office complex has no capacitor banks, any capacitor-switching tran-
sients must originate from the utility side located upstream from the
data acquisition node. The module correctly determines the relative
location of the capacitor bank. Note that there are some instances where
the expert system was not able to determine the relative location of the
capacitor bank. From the time stamp of the events, it is clear that capac-
itor bank energizations occur at about 5:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M. each day.
Capacitor-switching operation inspection module.
As described, capaci-
tor-switching transients are the most common cause of transient
events on the power system and are results of capacitor bank ener-
gization operation. One common thing that can go wrong with a capac-
itor bank is for a fuse to blow. Some capacitor banks may not be
operating properly for months before utility personnel notice the prob-
lem. Routine maintenance is usually performed by driving along the
line and visually inspecting the capacitor bank.
An autonomous expert system was developed for substation applica-
tions to analyze downstream transient data and determine if a capaci-
tor-switching operation is performed successfully and display a
warning message if the operation was not successful.14 With the large
number of capacitor banks on most power systems, this expert system
module can be a significant benefit to power systems engineers in iden-
tifying problems and correlating them with capacitor-switching events.
Successful capacitor bank energization is characterized by a uniform
increase of kvar on each phase whose total corresponds to the capaci-
tor kvar size. For example, when a 1200-kvar capacitor bank is ener-
gized, reactive power of approximately 400 kvar should appear on each
phase. The total kvar increase can be determined by computing kvar
changes in individual phases from the current and voltage waveforms
before and after the switching operation. This total computed kvar
Power Quality Monitoring
507
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

508
Chapter Eleven
Monitoring
system
Office
complex load
Figure 11.35
All capacitors are upstream from the monitoring location. Therefore, the
answer module should report upstream capacitor switching when such an event is cap-
tured.
Figure 11.36
The output of the capacitor-switching answer module for the one-line diagram
presented in Fig. 11.35.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

change is then compared to the actual or physical capacitor bank kvar
supplied by a user. If the expected kvar was not realized, the capacitor
bank or its switching device may be having some problems.
Figure 11.37 shows the application of the capacitor-switching opera-
tion inspector expert system in a commercial monitoring system. The
monitoring location is at the substation; thus, all capacitor banks along
the feeders are downstream from the monitoring location. The first
capacitor-switching event indicates that two phases of the capacitor
are out of service. Either the fuses have blown or the switch is mal-
functioning. The second event shows a successful capacitor-switching
operation.
Lightning correlation module.
The majority of voltage sags and outages
in the United States are attributed to weather-related conditions such
as thunderstorms. For example, TVA has approximately 17,000 mi of
transmission lines where lightning accounts for as much as 45 percent
of the faults on their system. The lightning correlation expert system
module is designed to correlate lightning strikes with measured power
quality events and make that information available in real time
directly at the point of measurement. Armed with the correlation
results, engineers can evaluate the cause and impact of voltage sags for
a specific customer at a specific monitoring point as well as evaluate
the impact on all customers for a given event.
When the lightning correlation module detects a voltage sag or tran-
sient event, it queries a lightning database via the Internet. The light-
ning data are provided by the U.S. National Lightning Detection
Network operated by Global Atmospherics, Inc. If the query returns a
result set, the lightning correlation module will store this information
in the monitoring system database along with the disturbance data for
information dissemination. The lightning data include the event time
of the strike, the latitude and longitude of strike location, the current
magnitude, and number of strokes.
Power Quality Monitoring
509
Figure 11.37
Analysis results of the capacitor-switching inspector expert system.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The following example illustrates how the module performs its func-
tion. On Easter Sunday, March 31, 2002, in Knoxville, Tennessee, the
location of the Electrotek Concepts primary engineering office, thun-
derstorms moved through the area around 11:00 A.M. Figure 11.38
shows the four lightning strikes in the Cedar Bluff area of Knoxville.
The office complex, marked as “Electrotek,” has a data acquisition node
at the service entrance. Another data acquisition node marked as
“Cedar Bluff Substation” is connected at the 161/13-kV transformer on
the 13-kV side at the substation that feeds the Electrotek office about
1⁄2 mi away.
During the time of the storm, the power monitoring system captured
a number of events. The strikes shown in Fig. 11.38 were all within sev-
eral kilometers of the substation and are located directly on known dis-
tribution system right of way. Specifically, there were two events that
correlated within 100 ms of lightning strikes during the storm as
shown in the output of the lightning correlation module in Fig. 11.39.
Lightning strike data are summarized in Table 11.4.
510
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.38
Lightning strikes near a substation serving the Electrotek office on Easter
Sunday morning in 2002.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The output of the lightning correlation module clearly shows the cor-
relation between power quality events and lightning strikes. Note that
the power monitoring system is equipped with GPS-based time syn-
chronization; thus, it is capable of making precise multisource event
correlation. Two lightning strikes, at 11:13:15 A.M. and 11:14:34 A.M.,
shown in Table 11.4 are captured in both data acquisition nodes
installed at the Electrotek office and the substation.
11.5.3
Future applications
There are many applications for the intelligent power quality monitor-
ing concept. Some of the more important applications are listed in this
section. The examples described in Sec. 11.5.2 are also included in this
listing.
Power Quality Monitoring
511
Figure 11.39
Outputs of the lightning correlation expert system module.
TABLE 11.4
Lightning Stroke Data
Mag
Distance
Time stamp
Latitude
Longitude
(kA)
(km)
Strokes
Type
3/31/2002  11:15:21.700
35.962

84.048

58
6
10
CG*
3/31/2002  11:14:42.700
31.335

88.921
132
678
1
CG
3/31/2002 11:14:34.500
35.941

84.073

62
3
2
CG
3/31/2002  11:14:31.800
31.696

88.760
42
638
1
CG
3/31/2002  11:14:11.100
31.549

88.745

32
649
2
CG
3/31/2002  11:14:09.800
31.885

88.406

10
600
1
CG
3/31/2002  11:14:08.900
31.705

88.347

10
612
1
CG
3/31/2002  11:13:36.300
31.739

88.577

14
623
1
CG
3/31/2002  11:13:36.300
31.887

88.849
14
627
1
CG
3/31/2002  11:13:36.200
32.150

88.553
42
587
1
CG
3/31/2002  11:13:36.000
31.725

88.720
22
633
1
CG
3/31/2002  11:13:16.000
35.963

84.097

8
5
2
CG
3/31/2002 11:13:15.900
35.941

84.086

12
2
1
CG
3/31/2002  11:13:03.800
31.769

88.768

18
632
3
CG
*CG  cloud to ground.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Industrial power quality monitoring applications
■Energy and demand profiling with identification of opportunities for
energy savings and demand reduction
■Harmonics evaluations to identify transformer loading concerns,
sources of harmonics, problems indicating misoperation of equip-
ment (such as converters), and resonance concerns associated with
power factor correction
■Voltage sag impacts evaluation to identify sensitive equipment and
possible opportunities for process ride-through improvement
■Power factor correction evaluation to identify proper operation of
capacitor banks, switching concerns, resonance concerns, and opti-
mizing performance to minimize electric bills
■Motor starting evaluation to identify switching problems, inrush
current concerns, and protection device operation
■Short-circuit protection evaluation to evaluate proper operation of
protective devices based on short-circuit current characteristics,
time-current curves, etc.
Power system performance assessment and benchmarking
■Trending and analysis of steady-state power quality parameters (volt-
age regulation, unbalance, flicker, harmonics) for performance trends,
correlation with system conditions (capacitor banks, generation, load-
ing, etc.), and identification of conditions that need attention
■Voltage sag characterizing and assessment to identify the cause of
the voltage sags (transmission or distribution) and to characterize
the events for classification and analysis (including aggregation of
multiple events and identification of subevents for analysis with
respect to protective device operations)
■Capacitor-switching characterization to identify the source of the
transient (upline or downline), locate the capacitor bank, and char-
acterize the events for database management and analysis
■Performance index calculations and reporting for system bench-
marking purposes and for prioritizing of system maintenance and
improvement investments
Applications for system maintenance, operations, and reliability
■Locating faults. This is one of the most important benefits of the
monitoring systems. It can improve response time for repairing cir-
512
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

cuits dramatically and also identify problem conditions related to
multiple faults over time in the same location.
■Capacitor bank performance assessment. Smart applications can
identify fuse blowing, can failures, switch problems (restrikes, reig-
nitions), and resonance concerns.
■Voltage regulator performance assessment to identify unusual oper-
ations, arcing problems, regulation problems, etc.
■Distributed generator performance assessment. Smart systems should
identify interconnection issues, such as protective device coordination
problems, harmonic injection concerns, islanding problems, etc.
■Incipient fault identifier. Research has shown that cable faults and
arrester faults are often preceded by current discharges that occur
weeks before the actual failure. This is an ideal expert system appli-
cation for the monitoring system.
■Transformer loading assessment can evaluate transformer loss of life
issues related to loading and can also include harmonic loading
impacts in the calculations.
■Feeder breaker performance assessment can identify coordination
problems, proper operation for short-circuit conditions, nuisance
tripping, etc.
11.5.4
Power quality monitoring and 
the Internet
Many utilities have adopted power quality monitoring systems to con-
tinuously assess system performance and provide faster response to
system problems. It is clear that intranet and Internet access to the
information has been key to the success of these systems. An example
of a completely Web based power quality monitoring system is the
result of research initiated by TVA
and EPRI (Fig. 11.40).
Specifications for the system were developed with the help of all the
members of the EPRI Power Quality Target group to support the vari-
ety of applications which must be supported by such a system. The
result was a modular system with a completely open architecture so
that it can be interfaced with a wide variety of platforms.
After helping with the development of the system, TVA is deploying
the Web-based monitoring systems at important customers and sub-
stations throughout their system. TVA distributors are also taking
advantage of the system. It already had an extensive power quality
monitoring system in place, and the new system is integrated with the
existing monitoring system infrastructure at the central data manage-
ment level (enterprise level), as illustrated in Fig. 11.41. This provides
Power Quality Monitoring
513
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

the capability to provide systemwide analysis of the power quality
information.
The future of these systems involves integration with other data-collec-
tion devices in the substation and the facility. Standard interfaces like the
Power Quality Data Interchange Format (PQDIF) and COMTRADE are
used to share the information, and standard protocols like UCAare used for
the communications. The intelligent applications described will be applied
at both the substation level and at the enterprise level, as appropriate.
11.5.5
Summary and future direction
Power quality monitoring is fast becoming an integral component of
general distribution system monitoring, as well as an important cus-
tomer service. Power producers are integrating power quality monitor-
ing with monitoring for energy management, evaluation of protective
device operation, and distribution automation functions. The power
quality information should be available throughout the company via
the intranet and should be made available to customers for evaluation
of facility power conditioning requirements.
514
Chapter Eleven
Figure 11.40
Example of Web-based interface to the power quality monitoring system for
easy evaluation of system performance and individual disturbances.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

The power quality information should be analyzed and summarized
in a form that can be used to prioritize system expenditures and to
help customers understand the system performance. Therefore,
power quality indices should be based on customer equipment sensi-
tivity. The SARFI index for voltage sags is an excellent example of
this concept.
Power quality encompasses a wide range of conditions and distur-
bances. Therefore, the requirements for the monitoring system can be
quite substantial, as described in this chapter. Table 11.5 summarizes
the basic requirements as a function of the different types of power
quality variations.
The information from power quality monitoring systems can help
improve the efficiency of operating the system and the reliability of cus-
tomer operations. These are benefits that cannot be ignored. The capa-
bilities and applications for power quality monitors are continually
evolving. Ongoing development and new applications are described on
various Internet sites. One such useful site is www.powermonitoring.com.
Power Quality Monitoring
515
SCADA
Server
Server
Server
Modem
PQView
Database
Workstations
Master
Gateway
WAN/Intranet/Dialup
(TCP/IP)
Dialup
(Proprietary)
Substation
InfoNode
DataNode
DataNode
Hub
Modem or
Direct
Network
Connection
Figure 11.41
Enterprise-level integration of power quality information from a Web-based
power quality monitoring system with the overall monitoring system database at TVA.
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

516
TABLE 11.5
Summary of Monitoring Requirements for Different Types of Power Quality Variations
Type of power 
Requirements for 
Analysis and display
quality variation
monitoring
requirements
Voltage regulation 
Three-phase voltages
Trending
and unbalance
RMS magnitudes
Statistical evaluation
of voltage levels and
Continuous monitoring
unbalance levels
with periodic maximum,
minimum, and average
samples
Currents for response 
of equipment
Harmonic
Three-phase voltages 
Individual waveforms and FFTs
distortion
and currents
harmonics)
Trends of harmonic levels 
Waveform characteristics
(THD and individual 
128 samples per cycle minimum
Statistical characteristics of 
harmonic levels
Synchronized sampling of all 
Evaluation of neutral conductor 
voltages and currents
loading issues
Configurable sampling 
Evaluation with respect to standards 
characteristics
(e.g., IEEE 519, EN 50160)
Evaluation of trends to 
indicate equipment problems
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

517
Voltage sags, swells, 
Three-phase voltages and
Waveform plots and rms vs. time
and short-duration 
currents for each event
plots with pre- and postevent
interruptions
that is captured
information included
Configurable thresholds for 
Evaluation of cause of each event
triggering events
(fault upline or downline from 
the monitoring)
Characteristics of events with
actual voltage and current
Voltages and currents to evaluate
waveforms, as well as rms vs. 
load interaction issues
time plots
Magnitude duration plots superimposed 
RMS resolution of 1 cycle or 
with equipment ride-through characteristics
better during the rms vs. 
(e.g., ITI curve or SEMI curve)
time events  and for triggering
Statistical summary of performance 
(e.g., bar charts) for benchmarking
Evaluation of power conditioning 
equipment performance during events
Transients
Three-phase voltages and 
Waveform plots
currents with complete 
waveforms
Evaluation of event causes
(e.g., capacitor switching upline
Minimum of 128 samples 
or downline from monitor)
per cycle for events from the 
power supply system 
Correlation of events 
(e.g., capacitor switching)
with switching operations
Configurable thresholds 
Statistical summaries of 
for triggering
transient performance for
benchmarking
Triggering based on 
waveform variations, not 
just peak voltage
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

11.6
Power Quality Monitoring Standards
Standards are very important in the area of power quality monitoring.
Power quality levels must be defined consistently and characterized
using the same methods if they are going to be compared from one site
to another and from one system to another. IEEE 1159 is the IEEE
Working Group that coordinates the development of power quality
monitoring standards. The existing IEEE 1159 provides general guide-
lines and definitions for monitoring power quality, and there are three
separate task forces that are working on more specific guidelines and
requirements. Much of this work is being coordinated with IEC activi-
ties so that the monitoring requirements can be more consistent inter-
nationally. This section describes the most important IEEE and IEC
standards. These standards are a moving target as there are many
groups working on new developments.
11.6.1
IEEE 1159: Guide for power quality
monitoring
IEEE Standard 115915 was developed to provide general guidelines for
power quality measurements and to provide standard definitions for
the different categories of power quality problems. These definitions
were provided previously in Chap. 2 and provide the basis for a com-
mon language in describing power quality phenomena. Power quality
monitoring equipment can use this language to correctly differentiate
between different power quality variations and disturbances.
After publication of the basic monitoring guidelines, working groups
were established for development of more advanced guides for power qual-
ity monitoring. Three working groups were established. Progress can be
tracked at the IEEE 1159 website: http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/1159/.
The IEEE 1159.1 Working Group is developing guidelines for instru-
mentation requirements associated with different types of power qual-
ity phenomena. These requirements address issues like sampling rate
requirements, synchronization, A/D sampling accuracy, and number of
cycles to sample.
The IEEE 1159.2 Working Group is developing guidelines for char-
acterizing different power quality phenomena. This includes definition
of important characteristics that may relate to the impacts of the power
quality variations (such as minimum magnitude, duration, phase shift,
and number of phases for voltage sags). Example waveforms have been
collected illustrating the importance of different characteristics of the
power quality variations.
Recently, the work of the IEEE 1159.1 and 1159.2 Working Groups
has been combined into a single task force and is being coordinated
with the development on an international standard for characterizing
518
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

power quality variations with monitoring equipment—IEC 61000-4-
3016 (see Sec. 11.6.2).
The IEEE 1159.3 Working Group is defining an interchange format
that can be used to exchange power quality monitoring information
between different applications. IEEE developed the COMTRADE for-
mat for exchanging waveform data between fault recorders and other
applications, such as relay testing equipment. A more complete data
interchange format is needed for power quality data, which can include
harmonic spectra, rms envelopes, characterized power quality data,
and statistical power quality data, as well as steady-state and distur-
bance waveforms. The new Power Quality Data Interchange Format
(PQDIF) has been defined, and the standard is being balloted at the
time of this writing.17 The common data interchange format will allow
software developers to develop applications for analyzing power qual-
ity events and problems independently from the manufacturers of the
actual power quality monitoring equipment.
11.6.2
IEC 61000-4-30: Testing and
Measurement Techniques—Power Quality
Measurement Methods
IEC standards for monitoring power quality phenomena are provided
in a series of documents with the numbers 61000-4-xx. The individual
standards in this series cover specific requirements for each type of
power quality variation or concern. For instance, IEC 61000-4-7 pro-
vides the specifications for monitoring harmonic distortion levels. IEC
61000-4-15 provides the specifications for monitoring flicker, as previ-
ously described. The overall requirements for characterizing power
quality phenomena are summarized in a new standard that is just
being completed within IEC (61000-4-30). This new standard refers to
the appropriate individual standards (like 61000-4-7 and 61000-4-15)
for detailed specifications where appropriate.
This standard provides detailed requirements for the measurement
procedures and the accuracy requirements of the measurements. Not
all monitoring equipment will be able to meet the exact requirements
of this standard. As a result, two classes of measurement equipment
have been defined which can both be considered compliant with the
procedures of IEC 61000-4-30:
■Class A performance is for measurements where very precise accu-
racy is required. Two instruments that comply with the requirements
of class A should give the same results (within the specified levels of
accuracy) for any of the types of power quality variations considered.
These instruments could be appropriate for laboratories or for special
applications where highly precise results are required.
Power Quality Monitoring
519
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

■Class B performance still indicates that the recommended proce-
dures for characterizing power quality variations are used but that
the exact accuracy requirements may not be met. These instruments
are appropriate for most system power quality monitoring (surveys,
troubleshooting, characterizing performance, etc.).
The concept of aggregation is also introduced in this standard.
Aggregation is used so that multiple measurements that are associated
with essentially the same event are not counted multiple times. For
example, multiple voltage sags caused by reclosing operations should
only be counted as a single event for evaluating the impact on cus-
tomers and the number of problem events on the system. Three differ-
ent aggregation intervals are defined in IEC 61000-4-30: 3 s, 10 min,
and 2 h.
As mentioned, the work in IEC 61000-4-30 is also becoming the basis
for updates and enhancements to the IEEE power quality monitoring
standards (IEEE 1159 series). This is part of the general trend toward
internationalizing power quality standards.
These aggregation periods are also very important intervals for char-
acterizing steady-state power quality variations like voltage magni-
tude, unbalance, harmonics, and flicker. All these quantities are
described statistically using 10-min values as the most important
quantity.
Note that the basic measurement period for the steady-state power
quality parameters is 200 ms. This permits characterization of inter-
harmonics in 5-Hz bins, and it provides some smoothing of very fast
changes that should not be considered part of steady-state power qual-
ity performance. Of course, voltage sags and transients are character-
ized with actual waveforms and rms versus time plots.
11.7
References
1. EPRI-RP3098-01, An Assessment of Distribution System Power Quality.
2. A. McEachern, “Roles of Intelligent Systems in Power Quality Monitoring: Past,
Present, and Future,” Conference Record, Power Engineering Society Summer
Meeting, 2001, Vol. 2, pp. 1103–1105.
3. R. P. Bingham, “Recent Advancements in Monitoring the Quality of the Supply,”
Power Engineering Society Summer Meeting, 2001, Vol. 2, pp. 1106–1109.
4. Dranetz Engineering Laboratories, “Series 606 Power-Line Disturbance Analyzer,”
December 1975.
5. E. W. Gunther, J. Rossman, “Application of Advanced Characterization Algorithms,
UCA and Internet Communications Technology at the Point of Power Quantity and
Quality Measurement,” Conference Proceedings of EPRI PQA 1999.
6. IEEE Standard 141-1993: Recommended Practice for Power Distribution in
Industrial Plants.
7. IEEE Standard 519-1992: Recommended Practices and Requirements for Harmonic
Control in Electrical Power Systems.
520
Chapter Eleven
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

8. IEC 61000-4-15, Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC). Part 4: Testing and
Measuring 
Techniques. 
Section 
15: 
Flickermeter—Functional 
and 
Design
Specifications.
9. D. A. Douglass, Potential Transformer Accuracy at 60-Hz Voltages above and below
Rating and at Frequencies above 60 Hz. Presented at the IEEE Power Engineering
Society Summer Meeting, Minneapolis, Minn., July 13–18, 1980.
10. D. A. Douglass, “Current Transformer Accuracy with Asymmetric and High
Frequency Fault Currents,” IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus on Systems, Vol.
PAS-100, No. 3, March 1981.
11. S. Santoso, J. D. Lamoree, “Answer Module: A Custom-Built Module to Meet Specific
Power Monitoring Tasks,” Conference Proceedings of EPRI PQA 2001, Pittsburgh,
Pa.
12. U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth, “From Data Mining to Knowledge
Discovery: An Overview,” in U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth, R.
Uthurusamy, eds., Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, MIT Press,
1996, pp. 471–494.
13. S. Santoso, R. C. Dugan, J. D. Lamoree, A. Sundaram, “Distance Estimation
Technique for Single Line-to-Ground Faults in a Radial Distribution System,”
Conference Record, Power Engineering Society Winter Meeting, 2000 IEEE, Vol. 4,
pp. 2551–2555.
14. S. Santoso, J. D. Lamoree, M. F. McGranaghan, “Signature Analysis to Track
Capacitor 
Switching 
Performance,” 
Conference 
Record,
Transmission 
and
Distribution Conference and Exposition, 2001 IEEE/PES, Vol. 1, pp. 259–263.
15. IEEE Standard 1159-1995, Recommended Practice on Monitoring Electric Power.
16. Draft Standard IEC 61000-4-30 77A/356/CDV, Power Quality Measurement Methods.
17. IEEE Draft Standard P1159.3, Recommended Practice for a Power Quality Data
Interchange Format—An Extensible File Format for the Exchange of Power Quality
Measurement and Simulation Data, SCC 22.
11.8
Bibliography
Cokkinides, C. J., L. E. Banta, A. P. Meliopoulos, “Transducer Performances for Power
System Harmonic Measurements,” Proceedings of the International Conference on
Harmonics, Worcester, Mass., October 1984.
“Computation of Current Transformer Transient Performance,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Delivery, Vol. PWRD-3, No. 4, October 1988.
Greenwood, A. N., Electrical Transients in Power Systems, 2d ed., John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1991, chap. 18.
McShane, E. L., M. E. Colbaugh, Advance Current and Voltage Transformers for Power
Distribution Systems, PRI Report EL-6289, 1989.
Power Quality Monitoring
521
Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.

Power Quality Monitoring
Downloaded from Digital Engineering Library @ McGraw-Hill (www.digitalengineeringlibrary.com)
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved.
Any use is subject to the Terms of Use as given at the website.
